ADVERTIMENT. Lʼaccés als continguts dʼaquesta tesi queda condicionat a lʼacceptació de les condicions dʼús
establertes per la següent llicència Creative Commons:http://cat.creativecommons.org/?page_id=184
ADVERTENCIA.El acceso a los contenidos de esta tesis queda condicionado a la aceptación de las condiciones de uso
establecidas por la siguiente licencia Creative Commons:http://es.creativecommons.org/blog/licencias/
WARNING. The access to the contents of this doctoral thesis it is limited to the acceptance of the use conditions set
by the following Creative Commons license:https://creativecommons.org/licenses/?lang=en
\n\n 
ESCOLA D’ENGINYERIA  
Departament d’Enginyeria Química, Biològica i Ambiental 
 
 
 
Bioprocess efficiency  
as a roadmap to establish  
Pichia pastoris as a 
 reliable cell factory 
 
 
 
Memòria per obtenir el grau de Doctor  
per la Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona.  
Programa de Doctorat en Biotecnologia 
 
Directors: Francisco Valero i José Luis Montesinos 
 
Xavier Ponte Font  
Bellaterra, 2017 
\n\n \n\n0.  
 I 
 
Abstract Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
ABSTRACT 
The present work is focused, with a bioprocess engineering point of view, in the 
production of the heterologous Rhizopus oryzae lipase expressed in the methylotrophic 
yeast Pichia pastoris  under the control of the methanol-induced alcohol oxidase 1 
promoter; and, specially, the improvement of the bioprocess efficiency by the use of 
proper operational strategies in fed-batch mode for bioreactors of different scale. With 
that, P. pastoris  is stablished as a versatile, robust and competent platform for the 
production of recombinant proteins. 
In a first part of the dissertation, the emphasis is put on reaching optimal levels of the main 
performance indexes of industrial interest at lab scale in methanol feeding strategies as 
the only carbon source and inducer. Prior to this final goal, though, preliminary studies 
and operational improvements were carried out to outcome system limitations and to give 
more versatility and robustness to the system. They included upgrades in system control 
and supervising in LabVIEW, installation of new hardware for instrumentation and a new 
feeding strategy for the nitrogen source added to the cultures. Later, a systematic study 
on the effect of the oxygen tension was conducted. It was found that, in normoxic 
conditions, dissolved oxygen can limit the process in both excess and lack. An optimal 
value of 25 % air saturation was found for all specific rates and results were validated by 
a consistency check and further data reconciling.  
From that point, the optimization of the bioprocess in bench-top bioreactor by the 
mathematical design of methanol feeding profiles was fulfilled. From modelling data, and 
by the use of a simple, versatile optimization tool, the simulation of the optimal methanol 
concentration profiles were carried out to maximize product titer and volumetric 
productivity, and then compared to previous strategies and then successfully applied 
experimentally.  
On the other hand, the next part of this document focuses on studies of scale down and 
up from the bench-top scale. The first change is downwards to a microbioreactor system 
of a 1000 µL scale. Cultures from that scale were successfully reproduced succesfully at 
lab scale to verify the system as suitable for clone screening and design of simple fed-
batch strategies. Finally, the bioprocess was brought up to a 50 L scale. Unfortunately, 
the attempts did not succeed on reproduce the bioprocess efficiency, but it was possible 
to discard some of the hypothesis that were brought up, and to settle some other ones 
that can be further investigated in the future, like oxygen mass transfer limitations. 
 \n\n0.  
 II 
 
Abstract Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
RESUM 
El present document està centrat en un punt de vista d’enginyeria de bioprocés, de cara 
a la producció heteròloga de la lipasa de Rhizopus oryzae , expressada en el llevat 
metilotròfic Pichia pastoris sota el control del promotor de l’alcohol oxidasa 1, induïble 
amb metanol. Especialment, l’objectiu es focalitza a la millora de l’eficiència del bioprocés 
mitjançant l’ús d’estratègies d’operació en discontinu alimentat en bioreactors de diferent 
escala. Amb això, es pretén establir P. pastoris  com una plataforma versàtil, robusta i 
competent per a la producció de proteïnes recombinants. 
A la primera part de la tesi, l’èmfasi es troba en l’assoliment de nivells òptims dels 
principals índexs de rendiment d’interès industrial a escala de laboratori, utilitzant 
estratègies d’operació amb metanol com a font única de carboni i inductor del promotor. 
Prèviament a aquest objectiu, però, es van realitzar estudis preliminars i millores 
operacionals per tal de superar certes limitacions del sistema i per aportar-hi versatilitat i 
robustesa. Entre ells, es va actualitzar i incorporar millores al programa de supervisió i 
control del procés en LabVIEW, s’hi instal·là nou hardware d’instrumentació i es va 
implementar una nova estratègia d’alimentació de la font de nitrogen. Posteriorment, un 
estudi sistem àtic de l’efecte de la disponibilitat d’oxigen es va dur a terme. Es va obtenir 
que, en condicions de normòxia, l’oxigen dissolt pot limitar el procés tant per un excés 
com per nivells escassos. El 25 % de saturació d’aire es va establir com a valor òptim de 
cara a les velocitats específiques, i els resultats van ser validats per un test de 
consistència i reconciliació de dades. 
A partir d’aquest punt, s’assolí l’optimització del bioprocés a escala de laboratori 
mitjançant el disseny de perfils d’alimentació de metanol amb eines matemàtiques 
d’optimització. A partir de dades de modelització i amb una eina d’optimització simple i 
versàtil, es van dur a terme les simulacions de perfils òptims de concentració de metanol 
per maximitzar la concentració de producte i la productivitat volumètrica, es van comparar 
amb estratègies anteriors i es van aplicar experimentalment amb èxit.  
Per altra banda, la següent part del document se centra en estudis de canvi d’escala. El 
primer que es realitza és a escala de microbioreactor. Es van reproduir uns cultius 
realitzats a aquella escala al laboratori per verificar aquest sistema com a vàlid per 
realitzar-hi assajos d’expressió i selecció de soques i per dissenyar-hi estratègies simples 
d’operació en discontinu alimentat. Finalment, el bioprocés va ser portat a escala pilot de 
50 L. Malauradament, els intents realitzats no van assolir reproduir l’eficiència del 
bioprocés, tot i que va ser possible descartar-ne algunes hipòtesis plantejades i proposar-
ne d’altres que hauran de ser investigades en un futur, com ara limitacions en la 
transferència d’oxigen. \n\nIII 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
1. Introduction: heterologous protein production by Pichia pastoris . A bioprocess 
engineering comprehensive design  ....................................................................................1 
 
2. Objectives ................................................................................................................................ 43 
 
3. Preliminar results: Pichia pastoris producing Rhizopus oryzae lipase under P AOX1 
control. first steps to the optimization of bioprocess efficiency ................................ 45 
 
4. Bioprocess efficiency of 
Rhizopus oryzae production under the control of PAOX1 is 
oxygen tension dependent. ................................................................................................. 61 
 
5. Towards optimal substrate feeding for heterologous protein production in 
Pichia 
pastoris fed batch process under PAOX1 control: a modelling aided approach. ..... 91 
 
6. The microbioreactor as a tool to evaluate fed-batch strategies and high-
throughput clone screening. ..............................................................................................123 
 
7. Upgrading to the first step up to industry. pilot plant scale production of ROL by 
Pichia pastoris under PAOX1 control ...................................................................................153 
 
8. General conclusions ............................................................................................................ 185 
 
 
 
 
 \n\nIV 
 
 \n\n 
 
 1 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
1 INTRODUCTION: HETEROLOGOUS PROTEIN 
PRODUCTION BY Pichia pastoris. A BIOPROCESS 
ENGINEERING COMPREHENSIVE DESIGN  
1.1 Bioprocess engineering 
 “Bioprocess engineering is the discipline that puts biotechnology to work”.  
This forceful statement was published by the National Research Council in 1995 [1]. Since 
the quite recent inception of Biotechnology as an industrial applied science during this 
last century, bioprocess engineering has been stablished and promoted itself as an 
alternative to classic industrial processes and for the synthesis of new products.  
Biotechnology can be divided into several color-classes, white biotechnology (industrial 
processes, fine chemical products, enzymes, biofuels), red biotechnology (pharma 
research), green biotechnology (agriculture), blue biotechnology (sea resources) and grey 
biotechnology (environmental bioengineering). Biotechnology and bioprocesses are, 
then, present in a wide heterogeneous range of fields. Some notorious examples are the 
production of biopharmaceuticals like recombinant second generation insulin or growth 
factors [2]; wastewater treatment plants or countless applications in the food industry, 
from brewery [3] to enzyme production for hydrolysis in milk manufacturing [4].  
Another perfect example is the development of biorefineries. In that way, Herrera (2004) 
[5], appointed the importance of biotechnology in the energy industry, and its potential to, 
at the same time, reduce the economic and environmental impact of selects a few projects 
funded by the US Department of Energy, in which the production of biofuel was specially 
praised. He also reviewed the decreasing of the both footprints of some bioprocesses, in 
comparison to their classic production like the manufacturing of Vitamin B2 (by BASF).   
Bioprocess engineering was more thoroughly defined by Doran (1995) [6], as an essential 
discipline for many food, chemical and pharmaceutical industries, which makes use if 
microbial, animal and plant cells, and components of cells such as enzymes to 
manufacture new products and destroy harmful wastes. Some other quotes can be found \n\n 
 
 2 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
around, which state that bioprocess engineers are those professionals who “bring 
engineering to life”. However, it actually goes both ways. The bioprocess engineer is a 
multidisciplinary professional who analyzes the properties of biological material and 
works with them to discover beneficial uses. In addition, they develop the biological 
systems used in the manufacture of products. Bioprocess engineers troubleshoot and 
monitor production equipment related to the production process and also product quality, 
overseeing inspection procedures. 
This chapter is conceived as a simple roadmap about some issues that are critical for the 
development of a bioprocess, directing the attention exclusively to its core, the bioreactor. 
The focus will be put on the excellence in production of heterologous proteins in 
Pichia 
pastoris, due to the approach of the experimental work of this thesis. In that way, Figure 
1.1 summarizes all concepts that will be highlighted as a network, which shows the 
relationship and dependency between them. The different steps of the development of a 
bioprocess, here represented as scales, from the microbioreactor and shake flask, 
stepping into the heart of a bioprocess development, which is the bench-top bioreactor, 
followed by the intermediate pilot scales up to the final industrial production volume 
bioreactor.  
1.2  The methylotrophic Pichia pastoris as a host for RPP   
The methylotrophic yeast Pichia pastoris has become, during last three decades, one of 
the most effective, used and versatile cell factories to produce all sorts of recombinant 
proteins [7]. It was first described as a host during the second half of the 80s by James M. 
Cregg and his coworkers [8], as an alternative to classic 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, still a 
fundamental cell host for many industrial bioprocesses nowadays. Among its advantages, 
the main reasons that made it emerge as a promising alternative are summed up: 
First, its ability to grow in define media up to very high cell densities. In that matter, 
Heyland et al. (2010) [9] reported a 200 g L-1 biomass concentration, expressed in dry cell 
weight (DCW), after a culture using glucose as carbon source.  
 \n\n 
 
 3 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish 
Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 1 .1 Bioprocess engineering design roadmap based on bioprocess efficiency. \n\n 
 
 4 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Apart from that, it presents a set of strong, tightly regulated promoters, which will be 
announced and discussed further in this text, both inducible and constitutive, that allow 
very high protein titers. One of the highest values reported corresponds to the production 
of hydroxynitrile lyase from 
Hevea brasiliensis, at 22 g L -1 [10], under the alcohol oxidase 
1 promoter (P AOX1 ), corresponding to the one which will be thoroughly studied in this 
dissertation. This process was also one of the first successfully established industrial-scale 
bioprocess using P. pastoris as the biocatalyst [11].  
When compared to other extended expression system, the major advantage of P. pastoris 
over Escherichia coli is that the first one is capable of performing post-translational 
modifications, such as conforming disulfide bonds and glycosylation of proteins. This 
means that in cases where disulfides bonds are necessary, E. coli might produce a 
misfolded protein, which is usually inactive or insoluble, or an inclusion body, needing a 
refolding procedure. 
Besides, as stated, 
S. cerevisiae has been hegemonic among yeasts in industrial 
applications, some of them as important as insulin, hepatitis B surface antigen or hirudin, 
among others [12]. Three main reasons explain that: the large amount of information to 
modify it genetically, it presents a set of secretory pathways and it also performs post-
translation modifications. However, some glycosylations led by this host system are not 
acceptable for many mammalian proteins. Moreover, 
P. pastoris overcomes S. cerevisiae 
in protein yield, e.g. the anticoagulant hirudin titer has been reported as three times higher 
in P. pastoris than its production in Saccharomyces [13]. Glycosylation is less extensive in 
P. pastoris in comparison, as well [14].  
On the other hand, if P. pastoris is contrasted to expression systems like Chinese Hamster 
Ovary (CHO) cells, Pichia usually gives much better yields [12], apart from the low 
complexity of media it requires to grow, in comparison, which can consist on a single C-
N-source broth.  
Furthermore, it is very important to remark that Food and Drug Administration conceded 
P. pastoris the status of GRAS (generally recognized as safe). Some example of profited 
processes from this status are the production of phospholipase C intended for animal 
feed purposes in 2006 [15] and a biopharmaceutical product, a recombinant kallikrein 
inhibitor to treat hereditary angioedema in 2010 [16]. \n\n 
 
 5 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Since then, P. pastoris has been used to express a largely numerous amount of 
recombinant proteins. Cereghino et al. (2000) [7] listed more than 200 proteins, both for 
industry, research and model ones, that have been produced with Pichia as its host. Today 
the P. pastoris system is licensed to more than 160 companies in the biotechnology, 
pharmaceutical, vaccine, animal health, and food industries [17]. Among them, industrial 
consolidated processes can be found such as the production of an engineered 
thermophile DNase (Affymetrix USB, Santa Clara, CA) [18]. Potential biopharmaceutical 
proteins of interest are also developed in 
P. pastoris [17], such as vaccines (Tetanus toxin 
fragment C [19]), hormones (Human parathyroid hormone [20]) or antibody fragments 
(A33scFv [21]). 
P. pastoris, specifically the wild type strain NRRL Y-11430 (originally from National Regional 
Research Center, ILL [8]), or CBS7435, has been classified as Komagataella phaffii [22]. 
This is the parental strain for the two most frequently used protein expression host strains 
GS115 (US Patent 4,879,231, Phillips Petroleum, 1989) and the prototrophic strain X-33. A 
set of most utilized and relevant strains of P. pastoris for the expression of RPP is further 
presented in this chapter. Among them, X-33, GS115 and KM71 are distributed 
commercially by Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA), earlier Life Technologies and 
Invitrogen.  
Despite what it has just been presented, P. pastoris main feature is precisely its ability to 
consume methanol as a sole carbon source (methylotroph). This is achievable thanks to 
the activity of the genes codifying for alcohol oxidase: AOX1  and AOX2 . They precisely 
constitute two of the main promoters, as it will be discussed followingly.  
1.2.1  Expression promoters 
As previously commented, one the main attractive features of P. pastoris Is the large 
number of available strong promoters which have allowed Pichia to overcome other cell 
factories in RPP yield. In Table 1.1¡Error! No se encuentra el origen de la referencia.,  the 
most used promoters, both in research and industry, are listed.  
 \n\n 
 
 6 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish 
Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Table 1 .1 Main classic and recent expression promoters in 
Pichia pastoris [23]
 
Promoter  (P) Gene / Encodes for  Regulation Repression Expression References 
AOX1 Alcohol oxidase 1 Inducible. 
Methanol 
Glucose 
glycerol, 
ethanol 
Very strong 
≈5% of poly(A)+ RNA 
[7] 
AOX2 Alcohol oxidase 2 Inducible. 
Methanol 
Glucose, 
glycerol, 
ethanol 
Weak 
≈ 10 % of P
AOX1  
[24] 
GAP Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase Constitutive - Very strong 
≈ P
AOX1  
[7,25] 
FLD1 Formaldehyde dehydrogenase 1 
Inducible. 
Methanol, 
methylamine 
Glucose 
(in absence of 
methylamine) 
Very strong 
≈ P
AOX1  
[26] 
PEX8 Peroxisomal matrix protein Inducible 
Methanol Glucose Weak [7,27] 
YTP1 Secretion GTPase Constitutive - Weak (less 1 % of P
GAP ) [28] 
DAS1 Dehydroxyacetone synthase Inducible 
Methanol Glucose Very strong 
≈ P
AOX1  
[29] 
PGK1 Phosphoglycerate kinase Constitutive - Weak 
≈10 % of P
GAP  
[30] 
ENO1 Enolase Constitutive - 20 – 70 % P
GAP  [31] 
CAT1 Involved in ROS defense 
Inducible. 
Methanol, oleic 
acid 
Derepressed 
(29 % of P
GAP  
on glucose) 
Very strong 
≈ P
AOX1  
[32] \n\n 
 
 7 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Among the promoters just listed, PAOX1  and P GAP  have stood out among the rest of them, 
as the numerous reports and applications show [7,23,33–35]. PAOX1  allows a very strong 
and tightly regulated induction of the RPP, by the use of methanol, acting simultaneously 
as inducer and carbon source. The fact that methanol is cheap, easy to obtain and the 
possibility to use it pure as feeding solution makes PAOX1  even more attractive. Methanol 
is also obtained as a residue or byproduct in numerous industrial processes, and can be 
reused as substrate [36]. 
The constitutive P
GAP  has parallelly stood out as an alternative to PAOX1 , avoiding the use 
of methanol by achieving also a strong regulation of the gene to express, as reported, a 
wide range of recombinant proteins.  
1.2.1.1  Alcohol oxidase promoters and methanol utilization (Mut) 
Methanol utilization pathway takes place in the peroxisome of P. pastoris and as told, its 
first enzyme, alcohol oxidase (AOX), is codified by the genes AOX1  and AOX2 , being the 
former one responsible for the 90% of its sequencing [37]. In  
 
Figure 1 .2 , the methanol assimilation route is presented, along the main pathways it 
precedes or leads to in the cytosol.  
\n\n 
 
 8 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 1 .2  S cheme of methanol utilization pathway of P. pastoris in the peroxisome and its linkage 
to other cytosolic routes [38].  
As seen in Figure 1.2, first methanol is assimilated and oxidized to formaldehyde and 
hydrogen peroxide (AOX). Catalase enzyme then breaks into it and produces oxygen and 
water. Formaldehyde, then, is oxidized (deassimilation pathway) or assimilated in the cell 
metabolism by condensation with xylulose 5-phosphate. The latter peroxisomal 
condensation reaction is catalyzed by a special transketolase called dihydroxyacetone 
synthase, DAS, which converts xylulose 5-phosphate and formaldehyde into the C3-
compounds dihydroxyacetone (DHA) and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (GAP), which are 
further metabolized in the cytosol. The energy production pathway, where NAD
+ is 
reduced to NADH, is driven mainly from formaldehyde, driven out of the peroxisome and 
then oxidized to formic acid by the formaldehyde dehydrogenase (FLD), which is further 
oxidized to CO 2  [38]. All genes in this pathway are, in different levels, induced by 
methanol. As commented, and as can be observed both in Table 1.1 and  
 
Figure 1 .2 , some of the main promoters belong to the methanol assimilation route, i.e. 
P AOX1 , PAOX2  and P FLD1. The latter took on importance due to the possibility of inducing the 
production of RPP by methylamine, avoiding methanol, with similar product yield in some 
examples in the literature if compared to PAOX1  [39]. 
The wild-type Pichia strains with fully functional AOX1  and AOX2  genes are commonly 
typified to have a methanol utilization plus phenotype (Mut+). Genetic manipulation on 
these genes originated a set of strains that are widely used and reported in the literature 
for bioprocess engineering purposes. In Table 1.2, main commercial Pichia strains are 
gathered, along some examples of application of each one.  
KM71 strain was originated by the truncation of the gene AOX1  by removing a fragment of 
it and replacing it with the ARG4  gene from S. cerevisiae. So, that generated an AOX1-
defective strain, with an approximate 10 % of capacity of methanol uptake. This led to 
name this kind of strains as Methanol utilization slow (Muts). Despite this low methanol 
uptake, Muts recombinant strains have been used extensively, due to its mild operational 
conditions and low oxygen demands. Finally, methanol utilization minus (Mut-) strains \n\n 
 
 9 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
(commercially MC-100-3) have, as well, inserted the gene HIS4  to become AOX2 -
defective. Scarce studies have been found of the use of this kind of strain, though 
inducible by methanol, it requires a non-repressing alternative carbon source [43].  
 \n\n 
 
 10 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish 
Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Table 1 .2  M ain 
P. pastoris strains used for transformation.  
Strain Genotype  Main feature Application Reference  
NRRL * Y -11430  
(CBS7435) Wild type Mut+ Generation of the rest of 
strains [8,40] 
X -33 
(ThermoFisherTM) W ild type Mut+ 
P
AOX1  and P
GAP  transformants 
Selectable marker: zeocin 
resistance 
pPicZ and pGapZ plasmids 
[41] 
GS115  
his4 
Deficient in histidinol 
dehydrogenase  
Mut+ 
Selectable markers: Zeocin 
resistance and 
HIS4 gene 
P
AOX1  and P
GAP  
transformants. 
[8] 
KM71  
∆aox1::ScARG4 his4 arg4
** Non-functional P
AOX1 . 
Muts  
Low methanol uptake rate 
processes [42] 
MC100 -3 
his4 arg4 aox1∆::ScARG4 aox2∆::Pphis4  Non-functional P
AOX1  and P
AOX2 . 
Mut-  
Methanol as inducer but not 
to be consumed [37,43] 
SMD1168  
his4 pepA Protease deficient strain 
Mut+  [44] 
PichiaPinkTM  
ade2 Adenine deficient strain Selection with adenine 
Protease reduced [45,46] 
GlycoSwitchTM  
endoT ***
 Reduced N-glycan heterogeneity Therapeutic application 
Human protein production [47,48] 
*National Regional Research Center, ILL. 
**Sc stands for a gene from 
S. cerevisiae; Pp , from 
P. pastoris. 
***Expression of the fungal endoglycosidase endoT (non-published data [48]). \n\n 
 
 11 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
The present document has been build out from the work carried out using a modified X-
33 strain expressing the Rhizopus oryzae lipase (ROL), transforming a single copy of the 
gene using a pPICZA-ROL, as described by Minning et al. (1998) [49].  
1.2.2  State of the art. Current applications and development 
1.2.2.1  Synthetic biology and metabolic engineering  
Figure 1.3 summarizes the state of the art of three main trends which research in P. 
pastoris, in a synthetic biology point of view, is now being focused. The objectives are 
clear, mainly overcome the drawbacks Pichia present in front of other expression system 
in order to definitely give it a boost and establish as a hegemonic host for therapeutic 
proteins.   
 
Figure 1 .3 Current trends in synthetic biology research to promote biopharmaceutical 
heterologous production in Pichia pastoris [50].  
 
Firstly, as commented, recent advances in glycoengineering of P. pastoris have allowed 
the development of new strains that successfully and productively fold RPP with a human 
glycosylation, avoiding hyperglycosylation and other phenomena that would lead to 
unsuitable products. The GlycoDeleteTM technology has built the grounds of this path, 
presenting promising strains that are now available in the market (GlycoSwitchTM) [48], 
mentioned in Table 1.2. From now on, the challenge goes through new innovative 
approaches to improve glycol-engineering of yeast, for example, regarding O-
glycosylation [51].  
Furthermore, the development of recent synthetic promoters is trying to push 
Pichia 
through a strong expression of RPP while avoiding the use of methanol. In that way, an 
example of a modification of P AOX1  successfully achieved derepression in glucose growth 
\n\n 
 
 12 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
through small deletion and point mutations [52]. This so-called derepressed promoters 
have been applied in several recent works for RPP, like phospholipase C from Bacillus 
cereus, using a mutated PAOX1  that gets de-repressed at limiting concentrations of glycerol 
[53]. 
Finally, bioinformatics tools have also boosted research in systems biology and metabolic 
engineering of P. pastoris. A wide understanding of this expression host has been 
pursued, and this has resulted in recent development of genome-scale models [54–56], 
and have been useful, for example, to predict overexpression and deletion mutants to 
enhance recombinant protein production, as well as to deepen into knowledge of, not 
only the central carbon metabolism, but also of sphingolipid biosynthesis and 
glycosylation pathways, as well as the oxidative phosphorylation electron transport chain 
[56].  
Finally, recent brand-new technology in genetic engineering 
CRISPR/Cas9  has been 
applied in Pichia and deserves to be mentioned. This technique is one of the most 
promising tools for targeted genome engineering because of its flexibility to achieve 
multiplexing, the ease of retargeting and the ability to introduce site specific modifications 
[57]. CRISPR/Cas9  has been recently and successfully used for gene disruption studies, 
to introduce multiplexed gene deletions and to test the targeted integration of 
homologous DNA cassettes [58].  
1.3 Monitoring, modelling and control of bioprocesses 
1.3.1 Excellence in industrial bioprocesses: Process Analytics Technology (PAT), 
Quality by Design (QbD) and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA)  
Any industrial process must achieve efficiency, reproducibility, quality, safety and 
traceability. To ensure that, it has been considered, in this dissertation, that two 
bioprocess quality procedures for good practices must be followed, i.e. PAT and QbD, 
along with SCADA procedures, which are essential to fulfill these objectives and 
codependent between them. \n\n 
 
 13 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
First, Process analytical technologies (PAT) are systems for analysis and control of 
manufacturing processes based on timely measurements of critical quality parameters 
and performance attributes of raw materials and in-process products, to assure 
acceptable bioprocess efficiency and final product quality. It is important to note that the 
term analytical in PAT is viewed broadly to include chemical, physical, microbiological, 
mathematical, and risk analysis at the same time. The application of the PAT to 
Bioprocesses is designed by BioPAT, a concept that was defined by Känsäkoski 
et al. 
(2006) [59], and was mainly intended to be applied to the industry of biopharmaceuticals. 
The goal of PAT is to enhance understanding and control the manufacturing process, and 
is achieved by following these steps:  
1. Identify t
 he critical or limiting quality that needs to be monitored and controlled. 
This is the key step to select the suitable strategy to work with.  
2.  Ensure monitoring q uality ensuring by selecting the suitable technology, in case 
of need, through soft sensors which can monitor certain limiting parameters and 
not accessible directly by conventional sensors.   
3. Analyze 
 statistically the relationship between the critical quality attribute and the 
bioprocess efficiency. 
4.  Control t he critical quality attributes within the levels stablished in the previous 
step. 
5. Finally, report t he performance of step 4, ensuring the objectives that were 
formulated have been accomplished and no unexpected perturbations have taken 
part during the process.  
Secondly, Quality by Design (QbD) is a concept that is trying, recently, to make itself 
through, mostly, the biopharmaceutical industry. Despite being much related to PAT, it 
emphasizes its objectives in two main pillars: achieving the desired product quality and 
the need for it to be guaranteed from the design of the process. QbD approach, then, is 
expected to ‘‘build quality into the process’’ rather than ‘‘testing quality into the product’’ 
[60]. Process development based on QbD normally employs design of experiments (DoE) 
tools to comprehensively define the interaction between parameters of the process and 
quality of the product. This procedure has been widely applied in reported works, as said, 
mostly to obtain suitable heterologous biopharmaceutical products [60,61]. \n\n 
 
 14 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Finally, despite being conceptually more distant from the two previous quality guidelines, 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) is paramount to accomplish the 
objectives they present. SCADA is that software involved in the supervision of the full 
control architecture and, also, the responsible for the acquisition of every single data that 
is being monitored live and in real-time from the whole process and to ensure the 
communication between the system and all its peripherals. It is a purely software package 
that is positioned on top of hardware to which it is interfaced, usually by Programmable 
Logic Controllers (PLCs), or other commercial hardware modules [62]. Its reliability and 
robustness have made it predominant in industry of any field. Some examples of 
implementation to the biotech industry can be found in the literature [63,64], and Figure 
1.4 shows a scheme of an hypothetical case of this application. 
 
Figure 1 .4  D iagram of a SCADA supervisory system of an hypothetic set of bioprocesses [65].  
 
1.3.2 Operational strategies in bioreactors 
A bioreactor is defined as any space, where a biochemical reaction or a set of them are 
carried out by the action of a biocatalyst, assuming an enzyme or a microorganism. The 
challenge of the bioprocess engineer in the first step is finding the suitable operational 
\n\n 
 
 15 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
strategy to obtain a product of interest in a profitable and most productive way as 
possible.  
The objective, at the time of designing operational strategies, is always to pursue the 
maximization of one or various performance indexes (PI) of the bioprocess. That goes, 
therefore, in favor of bioprocess efficiency. One of the most common ones is productivity, 
which indicates the amount of interest product (in total amount or in concentration) per 
unit of time. Moreover, product yield is often considered, since it connotes the level of 
substrate exploitation. Product concentration is, as well, a key performance index in 
processes with a high-added value product. Finally, product quality is a criterion that may 
be critical for some processes, e.g. the glycosylation pattern of a recombinant protein (RP) 
intended for pharma applications. 
1.3.2.1 Operational modes in bioreactors 
A fed batch operational mode is that one in which one or more substrates are added 
throughout a determined amount of time of the process (in contrast to batch mode, where 
no inlets are present). This substrate is usually the limiting one, normally being the carbon 
source (but often nitrogen or even oxygen) to bring process, so processes where the 
inlets are specifically acid/base adjusting solution or antifoam are simply considered as 
batch or discontinuous mode. Strictly, there are no outlets, except for those intended for 
samples and, in case of aeration, the gas itself and possible stripped components from 
the broth. 
Fed batch mode is the most extended one among bioprocesses involving growth of 
microorganisms, since their kinetics tend to show inhibitions to high concentrations of any 
substrate required for the metabolic performance, the production of secondary 
metabolites,  or to any product that may eventually accumulate [66,67]. With that, fed 
batch allows to reach significantly higher levels of biomass and product concentration in 
comparison with a simple batch mode. Fed batch operation was first introduced in 
S. 
cerevisiae production in early 1900’s and has gained relevance in the rest of applications 
of white biotechnology.  
The opposed operations to batch and fed-batch are the continuous modes. The most 
extended one among ideally considered as “perfect mix regime” is the chemostat. Its main \n\n 
 
 16 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
feature in cell is that the specific growth rate (µ, h -1) is physically adjustable by the dilution 
factor (D), as they are equal, just as it is deduced from the biomass individual mass 
balance. As it eventually reaches a steady state, also physiologic, chemostat is the most 
suitable method to characterize the physiology of the cells.  
Regarding the selection of the most suitable 
strategy in each process and for each 
operational mode, the possibilities are 
countless, not to say infinite. The design of 
operational strategies sometimes becomes 
an art where trial and error is the main rule of 
thumb. Kinetics of the cell physiology, 
though, has a main role in their conception. 
First of all, the characterization of the 
physiology of the cells is paramount to 
achieve success in the design of the best 
operational strategy. A very appropriate 
review on that matter, Egli (2015) [68] 
appointed the importance a rational kinetic 
study, always based on 
µ, and promoted all 
efforts on monitoring and control of the 
process, and therefore, the performance of 
the operational strategy itself, towards the 
control of this physiologic parameter, directly 
or indirectly, regardless of the microorganism 
that is acting as biocatalyst. That work also highlighted the importance of media 
components out of the limiting carbon source that can hamper the study or show limitation 
if the necessary ratios in respect to the C-source are not kept. Cos 
et al. (2006) [34] and 
Looser et al. (2014) [69] summarize the tendency of the last decades in the design of 
operational strategies for the particular case of heterologous proteins produced in Pichia 
pastoris (Komagataella phaffii). All of them rationally appoint the need to determine the 
relationship of the product specific rate (qP , mg g-1 h -1) and µ. In Figure 1.5, two different 
Figure 1 .5  Example of relationship qP  - µ  for 
two different P. pastoris expression systems 
[69].  \n\n 
 
 17 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
examples of this kinetic relation are presented, for different promoters and RP. It can be 
perceived how two processes in the same organism present completely opposite 
tendencies of those profiles. Moreover, this relationship must be empirically determined 
in each case, and its shape will directly determine the most suitable strategies.  
Some of these operational strategies have been gathered together in this section and 
classified followingly.  
1.3.2.2  Limiting carbon source-based strategies 
These strategies consist on conceiving a feeding profile of the limiting C-source to drive 
the culture into a certain region of the cell growth kinetics that favor, in a certain way, the 
bioprocess efficiency, which can be directed towards either obtaining a product of interest 
(endogenous or heterologous), or rather the cells themselves, or the elimination of a 
certain compound as a substrate.  
The possibilities and complexity on the design of strategies are in a widespread range 
depending on the information of the kinetics and, at the same time, the availability of 
monitoring and control techniques at the disposal of the engineer. The general trend as 
the first step forward to an efficient bioprocess is an exponential feeding that can keep a 
constant 
µ. The objective here goes two ways: apart from stepping to bioprocess 
efficiency, reproducibility between different batches is fundamental. This method is widely 
applied in aerobic microbial processes (bacteria and yeasts) for its simplicity and low 
monitoring and control requirements. The most classic example is the recombinant 
protein production in E. coli under the control of promoters inducible by IPTG, which is 
not metabolized, where an exponential feeding rate is set to maintain a constant µ [70].  
Little information of the cell physiology is needed, too, and a simple open-loop control of 
µ can be applied, following Equation 1.1, an expression deduced from the substrate mass 
balance, where a constant substrate concentration, and therefore, µ, is assumed: 
 ≈  · 
 · exp
 −  
/
∗ · 
 
Equation 1 .1   
Where F stands for the volumetric feeding rate (L h-1), X  is the biomass concentration (g L-
1), t is the process time (h), Y* X/S is the global biomass-substrate yield (g g-1) and Sfeed , the \n\n 
 
 18 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
substrate concentration of the feeding solution (g L-1). The subscript SP denotes the set-
point of the variable and 0, the initial value.  
The operational strategy just presented usually is put to practice by maintaining a 
substrate concentration that is near to zero, situation commonly named as substrate 
limited conditions or fed-batch (SLFB). It is important not to be confused with the concept 
of limiting substrate, meaning the one that will mainly govern the process kinetics.  
Cell culture processes also employ this kind of feeding strategies, or even more simplistic 
ones, like stepwise increasing feeding profiles, willing to achieve more scalability, due to 
their higher complexity in respect to microbial cultures, and therefore, the larger amount 
of perturbations that could hamper that scalability, for instance, factors that can affect the 
glycosylation pattern of a monoclonal antibody [71] and therefore hampering product 
quality.  
Besides, strategies based on substrate non-limited conditions (SNLFB) have been widely 
described and employed [72–74]. They require a substrate control which can be 
conducted directly or through measurement of indirect variables. Closed-loop control is 
more common in this case, since predictability is much more complex, even more when 
the growth rates are high, which corresponds to the normal situation at non-limited 
substrate conditions (saving some inhibition patterns).  
This strategy goes in favor of achieving a tight regulation of promoters that are strongly 
induced or derepressed in conditions of growth at moderate or high C-source 
concentration, for those processes of recombinant protein production (RPP). Non-limited 
substrate conditions are widely applied mostly in microbial cultures, both bacteria and 
yeasts [74–76], and have also outstood among 
P. pastoris expressing heterologous 
proteins under the control of the alcohol oxidase promoter 1 (PAOX1 ), very strongly induced 
by methanol, in strategies that received the name of methanol non-limited fed-batch 
(MNLFB) [34,69,74,77]. In those cases, the simplicity that methanol limited fed-batch 
(MLFB) alternatives would have offered was sacrificed in favor of boosting the 
performance indexes of the process.  \n\n 
 
 19 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
1.3.2.3 Alternative fed-batch operational strategies 
As stated previously, the design of operational strategies opens a whole world of 
possibilities. Apart from the alternatives already commented, other limiting parameters 
can be selected in order to design novel strategies based on them. They are usually 
considered for the need to deepen into the knowledge of the cell physiology, overcome 
tricky perturbations of the system and ensure reproducibility against them.  
Though kinetic studies are usually carried out in chemostat, this system is very time 
consuming, especially at low 
µ, and requires high expenses in substrates, as the common 
criteria is to wait 4 or 5 residence times to ensure reaching the steady state. So, as a first 
example of alternative operational strategy, the dynamic pulsed feeding fed-batch was 
proposed by Dietzsch 
et al. (2011) [78]. In there, a single experiment was enough to 
determine the main maximum specific rates at different temperatures of a Pichia pastoris 
culture producing the horseradish peroxidase. In Figure 1.6, the performance of this 
strategy is shown, as the evolution of carbon dioxide evolution rate (CER) and the off-line 
values of specific methanol uptake rate (
qS) and the specific production rate (qP ). This 
method, though, present some drawbacks and it is not applicable to any expression 
system: it leads the process to be exposed to perturbations like cell aging or death or 
product accumulation. This information, though could be used by the authors afterwards 
for carrying out a process in the best conditions of temperature, and to perform another 
alternative operational strategy, a dynamic, using a SLFB-kind of procedure, and which is 
also suitable for working with mixed substrates [79,80]. 
Apart from this example, some other reported cases have been brought together in Table 
1.3. There, strategies governed by the oxygen availability or temperature can be found, 
and as well C-source based ones with some more level of complexity, like the use of 
mixed substrates or the consecution of starving periods to enhance greater production. 
 \n\n 
 
 20 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 1 .6  Example of a dynamic batch with pulses. Particular case of P. pastoris- based process 
where pulses of methanol were added at different temperatures to evaluate the effect on qS and 
qP  [78].   Lines represent carbon dioxide evolution rate (CER) while points indicate either qS or qP  
 
 As seen in Table 1.3, particular aims of each process lead to choose which component or 
state variable will be the limiting (or limited) condition. For instance, in OLFB case the 
authors demonstrated the mAb they produced had a much better ratio of intact N-glycans 
at hypoxic conditions. Also, limiting the process by its temperature enabled, in TLFB 
strategy culture, to avoid the production of proteases.  
\n\n 
 
 21 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish 
Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Table 1 .3 E xamples of operational strategies employed in 
P. pastoris based on criteria out of limiting C-source or in combination with it. 
Strategy  Feature Goal or PI  Product  Op. mode  Reference 
Oxygen limited fed batch  
(OLFB)  
Growth at DO = 0% 
Pulsed feeding 
Productivity 
Product quality 
Glycosylated mAb 
Fed-batch (growth) 
+ 
Batch with pulses 
(induction) 
[81] 
Oxygen -limiting 
+  
MNLFB  
L
imitation of methanol and 
oxygen (in normoxia) 
Physiology vs DO 
Productivity 
Rhizopus oryzae 
lipase (ROL) 
Fed-batch [77] 
Dynamic pulsed fed batch  
Pulsed feeding 
Normoxia 
Physiology vs 
temperature 
Horseradish 
peroxidase 
Fed-batch  
(batch with pulses) 
[78] 
MNLFB  
+  
(SLFB) 
D
ual C-source 
Growth (SLFB) and 
induction (MNLFB) 
Productivity 
Repressing effect 
of C-source 
ROL Fed-batch [82] 
Temperature (T) limited fed -batch  
(TLFB) 
Regulated T by a control 
of DO 
Reduction of 
proteolysis 
Fusion protein 
CALB + CBM
 
Fed-batch [83] 
Substrate limited fed-batch 
+  
Carbon starving stages 
P
eriods of glucose 
starving enhance 
q
P  
Productivity 
Antibody 
fragment 
Fed-batch [84] \n\n 
 
 22 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
1.3.3 Monitoring and control of bioprocesses 
The consecution and achievement of a robust, efficient, and reproducible operational 
strategy in a bioreactor is based on a solid ground in monitoring and control of the main 
process variables that govern and limit the process that is being performed in it. This 
section is not intended as an extensive review of the different options of monitoring and 
control of the state variables taking part in a bioprocess, which have been extensively 
reviewed, but to highlight the main trends and advances in automatic monitoring and 
advanced control.  
1.3.3.1 Advances in monitoring of bioprocesses 
In this section, some non-conventional and also recent advances in monitoring techniques 
will be reviewed.  
This field, on one hand, is evolving towards non-invasive sensors, due to the increasing 
prominence of the single use bioreactor technology. Another application are 
microsensors, intended for cultures at scale smaller than the milliliter. An example is the 
use of optodes for monitoring the main state variables as pH or dissolved oxygen. Their 
versatility even allows to implement fluorometric detectors, able to monitor, for example, 
the level of metabolites as riboflavin, which can be indirectly correlated to the biomass 
concentration [85]. In Figure 1.7 a commercial image from m2p-labs (Baesweiler, 
Germany), who develop this technology, is shown. 
Furthermore, focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) and in situ microscopy are 
also technologies developed for the in-line monitoring of cell count and cell size 
distribution, and are capable to provide information of changes of morphology of cells 
that can be indirectly linked to physiologic phenomena.  
Moreover, flow injection analysis (FIA) has had, during last decades, a relevant role in 
monitoring of bioprocesses. It was introduced by Ruzicka and Hansen (1980) [87] and has 
quickly become accepted for chemical analysis and applied to life sciences because of 
its flexibility and short response time [88]. It consists on an automatic sampling and 
analysis that is accomplished by injecting a plug of sample into a flowing carrier stream.  
 \n\n 
 
 23 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 1 .7  O nline monitoring of dissolved oxygen and pH by optode technology in 
microbioreactors (m2p labs GmbH, Baesweiler, Germany) [86]. 
The versatility of FIA system allows a huge variety of sensors and analysis. Thousands of 
articles have been published about the application of this technology, but recently 
Trojanowicz and Kołacińska (2016) [89] carried out a comprehensive review highlighting 
some hundreds of classic and recent applications. Among those intended to the biotech 
field, detection of metabolites (both for bioprocess and metabolic flux analysis) and online 
activity assays, among many others, and can be coupled to powerful and like mass 
spectrometry (MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. In this 
document, different variations of the basic FIA are commented. One of them, the 
sequential injection analysis (SIA) is based on the mixing of the sample with a reagent in 
order to produce a measurable response [90]. An application for online monitoring 
methanol, as a substrate of a 
P.pastoris culture, was conducted by Surribas et al. (2003)  
[91], with the objective of designing and conducting bioprocess-efficient operational 
strategies. A scheme of this methodology is represented in Figure 1.8. 
\n\n 
 
 24 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 1 .8  S cheme of a SIA built up for the online monitoring of methanol concentration of a P. 
pastoris culture in bioreactor [91]. 
Finally, it is very remarkable to highlight the recent development and implementation of 
the concept of software sensors (soft sensors). They are based on indirect measurements 
of non-accessible parameters, so they require modelling data apart from real time 
measurement from a hardware sensor [92]. The principle of soft sensors is schemed in 
Figure 1.9. 
The hardware sensor is usually an in-line sensor, which does not require an extraction of   
the sample, like in SIA/FIA system. A notorious application is the NIR/MIR/RAMAN 
spectroscopy, allowing the monitoring of multiple metabolites. In the work published by 
Sivakesava 
et al. (2001) [93] glucose, lactic acid and optical density of a Lactobacillus casei 
could be monitored thanks to this technology. These technologies have been 
implemented, as well, in 
Pichia pastoris processes, and are widely reported in the 
literature. Among them, Fourier transform mid infrared (FT-MIR) and NIR spectroscopy for 
metabolite monitoring (methanol, glucose, lactate) [94–96], or even to perform real-time 
metabolic flux analysis [97], are some of the most notorious ones.  
\n\n 
 
 25 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 1 .9  Soft sensor principle [92].  
Some outstanding examples are, first, estimation of state variables and specific rates 
(growth, consumption and production) from NIR measurements in E.coli [98] or the on-line 
measurement of oxygen uptake rate (OUR) and carbon dioxide evolution rate (CER) from 
off-gas analysis in CHO cell cultures [99]. These sensors have also been applied to 
Pichia 
pastoris processes to successfully estimate specific growth rate, substrates and biomass 
concentration [100]. 
1.3.3.2 Main closed-loop control algorithms applied to bioprocesses 
The consecution of a robust control is essential to successfully apply the operational 
strategies that could have been designed to enhance the desired levels of bioprocess 
efficiency and avoid, perturbations that could hamper the quality of the product. 
Though open-loop control of 
µ (Equation 1.1) has been proved to be effective in some 
publications, other state variables of most processes must be kept at desired values by 
closed-loop control, to avoid perturbations, from the most straightforward, like 
temperature or pH, to other physiological parameters like specific rates or yields, as 
respiratory quotient (RQ) [101]. A few of closed-loop common types are commented 
followingly:  
• Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) 
PID represents one of the simplest and most used algorithms for control of all kinds of 
processes as it is simple to implement and easy to tune. The procedures to do so are 
quite straightforward (e.g. Ziegler–Nichols) and require no modelling of the system.  
\n\n 
 
 26 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 =  + 1
#$
%  


& + #'
d 
d ) 
Equation 1 .2  
Where k c is the proportional gain, τI is the integral time, τD derivative time constant, ε is 
the error (controller input), and y is the controller command (controller output). 
• Generic model control (GMC)  
GMC was proposed by Lee and Sullivan [102] as a need to overcome control discordances 
in processes presenting non-linear models. GMC, defines the performance objective in 
terms of time derivatives of the process output, minimizing the difference between the 
desired derivative of the process output and the actual derivative, by using information 
from modelling of the variable of interest.  Equation 1.3 illustrates its algorithm:  
&
& = *+ −− *,% − & 
Equation 1 .3 
Where y is the measured variable and y SP is the desired value of the control variable. K1 
and K 2  are parameters of the control. 
A
s examples, GMC was employed to control µ in a E. coli culture, outcoming PID 
performance [103]. 
• Fuzzy 
This kind of control is based on the principles of fuzzy logic, i.e overcoming uncertainties 
without the need of complex models or knowledge of the dynamics of the system. Instead 
off that, the evaluation of the system dynamics is based uniquely on the experience of the 
user and an evaluation of the current state of the process, by converting quantitative data 
into qualitative parameters. Scarce studies, though, have used fuzzy control on biotech 
applications, since this kind of procedure lead to more process uncertainties due to non-
linear process dynamics [104].  
• Adaptive control 
It consists on non-linear controller algorithms that contains parameters that can change 
and adapted along an on-going operation, in order to anticipate to system perturbations. \n\n 
 
 27 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
It can be based on previous experimental data or modeling of the system, or the 
observation of process dynamics behavior.  
1.3.4 Optimization of bioprocesses. From modelling to application of customized 
feeding strategies.  
Further knowledge of the system and the physiology is intended, in this section, as a step 
forward in the accomplishment of the optimal operational strategies. Before bringing any 
bioprocess up to production scale, it must be assured that the bioprocess engineer has 
taken the most out of the biocatalyst it is using. The thorough rational design of 
operational strategies, as explained in section 1.2.1, is the first step on accomplishing that 
goal. Nevertheless, the combination of mathematical modelling, advanced techniques in 
monitoring and control and optimization algorithms allows the consecution of next-level 
strategies, in the form of optimal feeding profiles, boosting the bioprocess efficiency.  
The search of customized feeding profiles has been carried out last decades for several 
processes of RPP and other metabolites in different hosts. Modak 
et al. (1985) [105] 
reviewed and showed theoretical optimal feeding profiles for different cases of 
relationships 
qP -µ (combinations of monotonical and non-monotonical behaviors) and for 
different performance indexes. Park (1988) et al. [106] built optimal policies for producing 
polypeptides from a baker’s yeast strain out of previous modelled kinetics using a simple 
Monod-Haldane structure. 
1.3.4.1 Modeling cell kinetics. Genome-scale, mechanistic and unstructured modelling  
As just stated, kinetic modelling of the physiology of the cell must precede the conceiving 
of optimal feeding policies. However, possibilities among the complexity of models are 
very high.  
In one hand, on top of the range, genome-scale models (GSM), that have been stablished 
as key in systems biology for lots of species of microorganisms since about 15 years ago, 
provide a very accurate approximation of the metabolic behavior of the cell, being able to 
detect bottlenecks at a very detailed level, either metabolic, transcription or secretion. 
They are very useful to detect, for instance, target genes for being overexpressed or 
knocked out to enhance the synthesis of a product of interest or rather to avoid \n\n 
 
 28 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
undesirable pathways, thus to build up efficient bioprocesses that can be driven to 
industrial scale [107]. Because of their complexity, however, they are often left apart or 
simplified to design concrete or definitive operational strategies.  
In that way, mechanistic models are placed in the middle ground between GSM and the 
simplest unstructured models. They combine empirical data such as most of kinetics along 
with mass, heat and momentum balances [108]. Within this category, though, complexity 
grade is also heterogeneous, since models can be segregated, when distinguishing a cell 
within a population of different strains or species, and structured, if the cells are 
considered as a multiple chemical component. Despite this, the rule of thumb in modelling 
should always be to consider the simplest alternative as possible to describe the system 
and predict its behavior in future approximations. Simple unsegregated and unstructured 
models have demonstrated to be rather suitable and have been applied for optimization 
of bioprocess efficiency [109–112].  
1.3.4.2  Optimization of operational feeding strategies 
Though it will be thoroughly detailed in chapter 5, the main principles will also be 
described in this section. As a final step, optimization is fulfilled by following this 
procedure: built an objective function in which a desired performance index will be 
optimized; set up the suitable model to describe the bioprocess, as told in the previous 
section; fix constraints, both for indicating operational limits and avoid numerical 
discordances and divergences and, finally, select the numerical procedure to solve the 
whole problem. In this way, options are to be found from the simplest to the most intricate. 
Generally, numerical methods applied to RPP production are divided into stochastic 
[110,113] and deterministic ones [114]. Though the former class usually does not fully 
guarantee global optimality, the main drawback of deterministic ones is the high 
computing effort it requires.  
1.4  Changes of scale in bioprocesses  
The change of scale is the last step to culminate the design of a bioprocess, once the 
bioprocess efficiency has been already achieved by following the steps of previous 
sections.  \n\n 
 
 29 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Scaling, though, is not a straightforward path. It Is very common to come across the 
situation of significantly lower efficiencies when changing scale. Among other causes, 
mainly the unexpected changes of the system hydrodynamics are the main reason of 
finding these discordances, mostly in processes where three phases coexist, implying 
mostly problems of mass transfer limitation. 
To sum up, the main objective in the change of scale procedure consists on selecting the 
conditions to reproduce the behavior of the whole set of state variables in the next scale. 
When this procedure involves the design of a new bioreactor, it is then called a scale-up 
(or down). 
1.4.1  Scaling up to pilot and industrial scale 
As it will be thoroughly detailed in chapter 7, bioprocesses are generally scaled up by a 
factor of 10. Some of the scaling-up methods are based on qualitative criteria (rule of 
thumb) or trial and error.  
Rules of similarity are also applied by reproducing the operational parameter that is found 
the most limiting for the process. Among them, the most common ones are the oxygen 
mass transfer coefficient (kLa), mixing time, stirring power per volume unit (P/V) or 
maximum shear stress, among others. While the first one is more used in high-oxygen 
demanding processes, shear stress is the criterion for those cells that can be easily 
damaged.  
Apart from that, limitations and discordances between scales are also solved by flow 
analysis, by techniques like real time distribution (RTD), empirical, or even computational 
fluid dynamics (CFD), based on modelling. There are some published works in the 
literature on CFD applied in pilot scale, for temperature distribution simulation [115], or to 
predict, for example, from a 10 L reactor, the flow dynamics of a wastewater bioreactor of 
3200 L [116]. 
1.4.2  Scaling down. The rise of microbioreactors 
The recent rise of the microbioreactor technology has given scale down a relevance in 
bioprocess design, as well as in genetic engineering. That is because of its great potential \n\n 
 
 30 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
as a high-throughput screening tool with a high level of monitoring and control of the 
process. As it will be more detailed in chapter 6, the technology of Robolector© (m2p-
labs, Baesweiler, Germany) is sampling-automatic, and makes possible to have working 
volumes of less than 1mL, avoiding thus a great amount of resources in a microtiter plate 
of 48 wells. Apart from that, the most promising feature of this technology is the possibility 
of performing simple fed-batch operational strategies. Scale down procedure, then, takes 
all sense, since the establishment of this system, apart from clone screening, for testing 
host cells directly to the conditions of the bench-top scale bioreactor (or at least at similar 
ones), will definitely overcome shake flasks as the standard method to do so, since they 
are more time and resource consuming, less reproducible and do not allow fed-batch-
continuous feeding strategies and complex monitoring.  
Robolector, appearing in Figure 1.10, has been successfully applied for different 
expressions systems, like 
Corynebacterium glutamicum [117] and P. pastoris [85]. 
 
Figure 1 .10  S ample image of RoboLector microbioreactor technology [86]. 
\n\n 
 
 31 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
1.5 References 
[1] M. Ladisch, The Role of Bioprocess Engineering in Biotechnology, Bridg. 34 (2004) 
25–32. 
[2] G. Walsh, Second-generation biopharmaceuticals, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 58 
(2004) 185–196. 
[3] C.P. Hollenberg, A.W.M. Strasser, Improvement of Baker’s and Brewer’s Yeast by 
Gene Technology, Food Biotechnol. 4 (1990) 527–534. 
[4] T. Vasiljevic, P. Jelen, Production of β-galactosidase for lactose hydrolysis in milk 
and dairy products using thermophilic lactic acid bacteria, Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. 
Technol. 2 (2001) 75–85. 
[5] S. Herrera, Industrial biotechnology-a chance at redemption, Nat. Biotechnol. 22 
(2004) 671–675. 
[6] P.M. Doran, Bioprocess Engineering Principles, 1st ed., Academic Press Inc., San 
Diego, 1995. 
[7] J.L. Cereghino, J.M. Cregg, Heterologous protein expression in the methylotrophic 
yeast Pichia pastoris, FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 24 (2000) 45–66. 
[8] J.M. Cregg, K.J. Barringer, A.Y. Hessler, K.R. Madden, Pichia pastoris as a host 
system for transformations, Mol. Cell. Biol. 5 (1985) 3376–3385. 
[9] J. Heyland, J. Fu, L.M. Blank, A. Schmid, Quantitative physiology of Pichia pastoris 
during glucose-limited high-cell density fed-batch cultivation for recombinant 
protein production., Biotechnol. Bioeng. 107 (2010) 357–68. 
[10] M. Hasslacher, M. Schall, M. Hayn, R. Bona, K. Rumbold, J. Lückl, H. Griengl, S.D. 
Kohlwein, H. Schwab, High-Level Intracellular Expression of Hydroxynitrile Lyase 
from the Tropical Rubber Tree 
Hevea brasiliensisin Microbial Hosts, Protein Expr. 
Purif. 11 (1997) 61–71. 
[11] M. Ahmad, M. Hirz, H. Pichler, H. Schwab, Protein expression in Pichia pastoris: 
Recent achievements and perspectives for heterologous protein production, Appl. \n\n 
 
 32 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 98 (2014) 5301–5317. 
[12] A.L. Demain, P. Vaishnav, Production of recombinant proteins by microbes and 
higher organisms, Biotechnol. Adv. 27 (2009) 297–306. 
[13] J.H. Sohn, H.A. Kang, K.J. Rao, C.H. Kim, E.S. Choi, B.H. Chung, S.K. Rhee, Current 
status of the anticoagulant hirudin: Its biotechnological production and clinical 
practice, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 57 (2001) 606–613. 
[14] C. Dale, A. Allen, S. Fogarty, Pichia pastoris: a eukaryotic system for the large-scale 
production of biopharmaceuticals, Biopharm. 12 (1999) 36–42. 
[15] V. Ciofalo, N. Barton, J. Kreps, I. Coats, D. Shanahan, Safety evaluation of a lipase 
enzyme preparation, expressed in Pichia pastoris, intended for use in the 
degumming of edible vegetable oil, Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 45 (2006) 1–8. 
[16] C.A. Thompson, FDA approves kallikrein inhibitor to treat hereditary angioedema, 
Am. J. Heal. Pharm. 67 (2010) 93. 
[17] C. Julien, Production of Humanlike Recombinant Proteins in Pichia pastoris, 
BioProcess Tech. 4 (2006) 22–31. 
[18] F. Sarmiento, R. Peralta, J.M. Blamey, Cold and Hot Extremozymes: Industrial 
Relevance and Current Trends, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 3:148 (2015). 
[19] J. Clare, K. Sreekrishna, M. Romanos, Expression of tetanus toxin fragment C, 
Methods Mol. Biol. 103 (1998) 193–208. 
[20] R. Vad, E. Nafstad, L.A. Dahl, O.S. Gabrielsen, Engineering of a Pichia pastoris 
expression system for secretion of high amounts of intact human parathyroid 
hormone, J. Biotechnol. 116 (2005) 251–260. 
[21] L.M. Damasceno, I. Pla, H.J. Chang, L. Cohen, G. Ritter, L.J. Old, C.A. Batt, An 
optimized fermentation process for high-level production of a single-chain Fv 
antibody fragment in 
Pichia pastoris, Protein Expr. Purif. 37 (2004) 18–26. 
[22] C.P. Kurtzman, Biotechnological strains of Komagataella (Pichia) pastoris are 
Komagataella phaffii as determined from multigene sequence analysis, J. Ind. 
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 36 (2009) 1435–1438. \n\n 
 
 33 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
[23] T. Vogl, A. Glieder, Regulation of Pichia pastoris promoters and its consequences 
for protein production., N. Biotechnol. 30 (2013) 385–404. 
[24] K. Kobayashi, S. Kuwae, T. Ohya, T. Ohda, M. Ohyama, K. Tomomitsu, Addition of 
oleic acid increases expression of recombinant human serum albumin by the 
AOX2 promoter in Pichia pastoris, J. Biosci. Bioeng. 89 (2000) 479–84. 
[25] H.R. Waterham, M.E. Digan, P.J. Koutz, S. V. Lair, J.M. Cregg, Isolation of the Pichia 
pastoris glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene and regulation and 
use of its promoter, Gene. 186 (1997) 37–44. 
[26] S. Shen, G. Sulter, T.W. Jeffries, J.M. Cregg, A strong nitrogen source-regulated 
promoter for controlled expression of foreign genes in the yeast Pichia pastoris, 
Gene. 216 (1998) 93–102. 
[27] H. Liu, X. Tan, K.A. Russell, M. Veenhuis, J.M. Cregg, PER3 , a Gene Required for 
Peroisome Biogenesis in Pichia pastoris, Encodes a Peroxisomal Membrane 
Protein Involved in Protein Import, J. Biol. Chem. 270 (1995) 10940–10951. 
[28] I.B. Sears, J. O’Connor, O.W. Rossanese, B.S. Glick, A versatile set of vectors for 
constitutive and regulated gene expression in Pichia pastoris, Yeast. 14 (1998) 783–
790. 
[29] J.F. Tschopp, P.F. Brust, J.M. Cregg, C.A. Stillman, T.R. Gingeras, Expression of the 
lacZ gene from two methanol-regulated promoters in Pichia pastoris, Nucleic Acids 
Res. 15 (1987) 3859–3876. 
[30] J.R.M. de Almeida, L.M.P. de Moraes, F.A.G. Torres, Molecular characterization of 
the 3-phosphoglycerate kinase gene (PGK1 ) from the methylotrophic yeast Pichia 
pastoris, Yeast. 22 (2005) 725–737. 
[31] G. Stadlmayr, A. Mecklenbräuker, M. Rothmüller, M. Maurer, M. Sauer, D. 
Mattanovich, B. Gasser, Identification and characterisation of novel Pichia pastoris 
promoters for heterologous protein production, J. Biotechnol. 150 (2010) 519–29. 
[32] T. Vogl, L. Sturmberger, T. Kickenweiz, R. Wasmayer, C. Schmid, A.M. Hatzl, M.A. 
Gerstmann, J. Pitzer, M. Wagner, G.G. Thallinger, M. Geier, A. Glieder, A Toolbox of 
Diverse Promoters Related to Methanol Utilization: Functionally Verified Parts for \n\n 
 
 34 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Heterologous Pathway Expression in Pichia pastoris, ACS Synth. Biol. 5 (2016) 172–
186. 
[33] B. Gasser, M.G. Steiger, D. Mattanovich, Methanol regulated yeast promoters: 
production vehicles and toolbox for synthetic biology, Microb. Cell Fact. 14 (2015) 
196. 
[34] O. Cos, R. Ramón, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, Operational strategies, monitoring 
and control of heterologous protein production in the methylotrophic yeast Pichia 
pastoris under different promoters: A review, Microb. Cell Fact. 5 (2006) 17. 
[35] A.L. Zhang, J.X. Luo, T.Y. Zhang, Y.W. Pan, Y.H. Tan, C.Y. Fu, F.-Z. Tu, Recent 
advances on the GAP  promoter derived expression system of Pichia pastoris, Mol. 
Biol. Rep. 36 (2009) 1611–1619. 
[36] H.L. Chum, R.P. Overend, Biomass and renewable fuels, Fuel Process. Technol. 71 
(2001) 187–195. 
[37] J.M. Cregg, K.R. Madden, K.J. Barringer, G.P. Thill, C.A. Stillman, Functional 
characterization of the two alcohol oxidase genes from the yeast Pichia pastoris, 
Mol. Cell. Biol. 9 (1989) 1316–23. 
[38] F.S. Hartner, A. Glieder, Regulation of methanol utilisation pathway genes in yeasts, 
Microb. Cell Fact. 5 (2006) 39. 
[39] O. Cos, D. Resina, P. Ferrer, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, Heterologous production of 
Rhizopus oryzae  lipase in Pichia pastoris using the alcohol oxidase and 
formaldehyde dehydrogenase promoters in batch and fed-batch cultures, 
Biochem. Eng. J. 26 (2005) 86–94. 
[40] P. Koutz, G.R. Davis, C. Stillman, K. Barringer, J. Cregg, G. Thill, Structural 
comparison of the 
Pichia pastoris alcohol oxidase genes, Yeast. 5 (1989) 167–177. 
[41] Stuart A. Rosenfield, Use of Pichia pastoris for Expression of Recombinant Proteins, 
Methods Enzymol. Vol 306. 306 (1999) 154–169. 
[42] J.M. Cregg, K.R. Madden, Development of yeast transformation systems and 
construction of methanol-utilization-defective mutants of Pichia pastoris by gene \n\n 
 
 35 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
disruption, in: G.G. Stewart, I. Russell, R.. Klein, R.R. Hiebsch (Eds.), Biol. Res. Ind. 
Yeasts, Vol. II, CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, FL, 1987: pp. 1–18. 
[43] V. Chiruvolu, J.M. Cregg, M.M. Meagher, Recombinant protein production in an 
alcohol oxidase-defective strain of Pichia pastoris in fedbatch fermentations, 
Enzyme Microb. Technol. 21 (1997) 277–283. 
[44] Y. Yu, X. Zhou, S. Wu, T. Wei, L. Yu, High-yield production of the human lysozyme 
by Pichia pastoris SMD1168 using response surface methodology and high-cell-
density fermentation, Electron. J. Biotechnol. 17 (2014) 311–316. 
[45] B. Li, Y. Cao, L. Zhou, C. Liang, F. Sun, A novel protein expression system-
PichiaPinkTM- and a protocol for fast and efficient recombinant protein expression, 
African J. Biotechnol. 10 (2011) 19464–19472. 
[46] A. Várnai, C. Tang, O. Bengtsson, A. Atterton, G. Mathiesen, V.G. Eijsink, Expression 
of endoglucanases in Pichia pastoris under control of the GAP  promoter, Microb. 
Cell Fact. 13 (2014) 57. 
[47] L. Meuris, F. Santens, G. Elson, N. Festjens, M. Boone, A. Dos Santos, S. Devos, F. 
Rousseau, E. Plets, E. Houthuys, P. Malinge, G. Magistrelli, L. Cons, L. Chatel, B. 
Devreese, N. Callewaert, GlycoDelete engineering of mammalian cells simplifies 
N-glycosylation of recombinant proteins., Nat. Biotechnol. 32 (2014) 485–9. 
[48] K. Claes, K. Vandewalle, B. Laukens, T. Laeremans, O. Vosters, I. Langer, M. 
Parmentier, J. Steyaert, N. Callewaert, Modular Integrated Secretory System 
Engineering in Pichia pastoris to Enhance G-Protein Coupled Receptor Expression, 
ACS Synth. Biol. 5 (2016) 1070–1075. 
[49] S. Minning, C. Schmidt-Dannert, R.D. Schmid, Functional expression of Rhizopus 
oryzae lipase in Pichia pastoris: high-level production and some properties, J 
Biotechnol. 66 (1998) 147–156. 
[50] T. Vogl, F.S. Hartner, A. Glieder, New opportunities by synthetic biology for 
biopharmaceutical production in Pichia pastoris, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 24 (2013) 
1094–1101. 
[51] B. Laukens, C. De Visscher, N. Callewaert, Engineering yeast for producing human \n\n 
 
 36 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
glycoproteins: where are we now?, Future Microbiol. 10 (2015) 21–34. 
[52] F.S. Hartner, C. Ruth, D. Langenegger, S.N. Johnson, P. Hyka, G.P. Lin-Cereghino, 
J. Lin-Cereghino, K. Kovar, J.M. Cregg, A. Glieder, Promoter library designed for 
fine-tuned gene expression in Pichia pastoris, Nucleic Acids Res. 36 (2008) 1–15. 
[53] S. Capone, J. Horvat, C. Herwig, O. Spadiut, Development of a mixed feed strategy 
for a recombinant Pichia pastoris strain producing with a de-repression promoter, 
Microb. Cell Fact. 14 (2015) 101. 
[54] B.K. Chung, S. Selvarasu, C. Andrea, J. Ryu, H. Lee, J. Ahn, H. Lee, D.-Y. Lee, 
Genome-scale metabolic reconstruction and in silico analysis of methylotrophic 
yeast 
Pichia pastoris for strain improvement, Microb. Cell Fact. 9 (2010) 50. 
[55] S.B. Sohn, A.B. Graf, T.Y. Kim, B. Gasser, M. Maurer, P. Ferrer, D. Mattanovich, S.Y. 
Lee, Genome-scale metabolic model of methylotrophic yeast Pichia pastoris and 
its use for in silico analysis of heterologous protein production, Biotechnol. J. 5 
(2010) 705–715. 
[56] M. Tomàs-Gamisans, P. Ferrer, J. Albiol, Integration and validation of the genome-
scale metabolic models of 
Pichia pastoris: A comprehensive update of protein 
glycosylation pathways, lipid and energy metabolism, PLoS One. 11 (2016) 1–24. 
[57] T. Gaj, C.A. Gersbach, C.F. Barbas, ZFN, TALEN, and CRISPR/Cas-based methods 
for genome engineering, Trends Biotechnol. 31 (2013) 397–405. 
[58] A. Weninger, A.M. Hatzl, C. Schmid, T. Vogl, A. Glieder, Combinatorial optimization 
of CRISPR/Cas9 expression enables precision genome engineering in the 
methylotrophic yeast Pichia pastoris, J. Biotechnol. 235 (2016) 139–149. 
[59] M. Känsäkoski, M. Kurkinen, N. von Weymarn, N. Pentti, P. Neubauer, E. Juuso, T. 
Eerikäinen, S. Turunen, S. Aho, P. Suhonen, Process analytical technology (PAT) 
needs and applications in the bioprocess industry, VTT Work. Pap. 60 (2006) 5–
100. 
[60] P.D. Bade, S.P. Kotu, A.S. Rathore, Optimization of a refolding step for a therapeutic 
fusion protein in the quality by design (QbD) paradigm, J. Sep. Sci. 35 (2012) 3160–
3169. \n\n 
 
 37 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
[61] D. Zalai, A. Golabgir, P. Wechselberger, A. Putics, C. Herwig, Advanced 
Development Strategies for Biopharmaceutical Cell Culture Processes, Curr. 
Pharm. Biotechnol. 16 (2015) 983–1001. 
[62] D. Bailey, E. Wright, Practical SCADA for industry, 1st ed., Elsevier, Burlington, 2003. 
[63] M. Metzger, Logix-based system for distributed process control of semi industrial 
pilot plants, IFAC Proc. Vol. 37 (2004) 130–135. 
[64] K. Joeris, A. Johnson, M. Brosnan, C. Cruz, C. Zhang, M. Burnett, K. Konstantinov, 
Integrating disparate analytical instrumentation into an automated process control 
system used in cell culture process development, in: 10th Int. IFAC Symp. Comput. 
Appl. Biotechnol., Cancún, 2007: pp. 407–410. 
[65] Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Bioprocess Design Engineering, (2017). 
https://www.sartorius.es/sartoriusES/es/EUR/integrated-solutions/bioprocess-
design-engineering (accessed June 23, 2017). 
[66] S. Aiba, M. Shoda, M. Nagatani, Kinetics of product inhibition in alcohol 
fermentation, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 10 (1968) 845–864. 
[67] J.H. Luong, Generalization of monod kinetics for analysis of growth data with 
substrate inhibition., Biotechnol. Bioeng. 29 (1987) 242–248. 
[68] T. Egli, Microbial growth and physiology: A call for better craftsmanship, Front. 
Microbiol. 6 (2015) 1–12. 
[69] V. Looser, B. Bruhlmann, F. Bumbak, C. Stenger, M. Costa, A. Camattari, D. Fotiadis, 
K. Kovar, Cultivation strategies to enhance productivity of 
Pichia pastoris: A review, 
Biotechnol. Adv. 33 (2014) 1177–1193. 
[70] D. Calleja, A. Fernández-Castañé, M. Pasini, C. de Mas, J. López-Santín, 
Quantitative modeling of inducer transport in fed-batch cultures of Escherichia coli, 
Biochem. Eng. J. 91 (2014) 210–219. 
[71] F. Li, N. Vijayasankaran, A. Shen, R. Kiss, A. Amanullah, Cell culture processes for 
monoclonal antibody production, MAbs. 2 (2010) 466–479. 
[72] W. Zhang, M.A. Bevins, B.A. Plantz, L.A. Smith, M.M. Meagher, Modeling Pichia \n\n 
 
 38 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
pastoris growth on methanol and optimizing the production of a recombinant 
protein, the heavy-chain fragment C of botulinum neurotoxin, serotype A, 
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 70 (2000) 1–8. 
[73] M. Jahic, A. Veide, T. Charoenrat, T. Teeri, S.-O. Enfors, Process technology for 
production and recovery of heterologous proteins with Pichia pastoris, Biotechnol. 
Prog. 22 (2006) 1465–73. 
[74] J.M. Barrigón, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, Searching the best operational strategies 
for Rhizopus oryzae lipase production in Pichia pastoris Mut+ phenotype: Methanol 
limited or methanol non-limited fed-batch cultures?, Biochem. Eng. J. 75 (2013) 47–
54. 
[75] S. Alfenore, X. Cameleyre, L. Benbadis, C. Bideaux, J.L. Uribelarrea, G. Goma, C. 
Molina-Jouve, S.E. Guillouet, Aeration strategy: A need for very high ethanol 
performance in Saccharomyces cerevisiae fed-batch process, Appl. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol. 63 (2004) 537–542. 
[76] M. Arndt, S. Kleist, G. Miksch, K. Friehs, E. Flaschel, J. Trierweiler, B. Hitzmann, A 
feedforward-feedback substrate controller based on a Kalman filter for a fed-batch 
cultivation of 
Escherichia coli producing phytase, Comput. Chem. Eng. 29 (2005) 
1113–1120. 
[77] X. Ponte, J.L. Montesinos-Seguí, F. Valero, Bioprocess efficiency in Rhizopus 
oryzae lipase production by Pichia pastoris under the control of P AOX1  is oxygen 
tension dependent, Process Biochem. 51 (2016) 1954–1963. 
[78] C. Dietzsch, O. Spadiut, C. Herwig, A dynamic method based on the specific 
substrate uptake rate to set up a feeding strategy for Pichia pastoris, Microb. Cell 
Fact. 10 (2011) 14. 
[79] D. Zalai, C. Dietzsch, C. Herwig, O. Spadiut, A dynamic fed batch strategy for a 
Pichia pastoris mixed feed system to increase process understanding, Biotechnol. 
Prog. 28 (2012) 878–86. 
[80] O. Spadiut, D. Zalai, C. Dietzsch, C. Herwig, Quantitative comparison of dynamic 
physiological feeding profiles for recombinant protein production with Pichia \n\n 
 
 39 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
pastoris, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 37 (2014) 1163–1172. 
[81] M. Berdichevsky, M. D’Anjou, M.R. Mallem, S.S. Shaikh, T.I. Potgieter, Improved 
production of monoclonal antibodies through oxygen-limited cultivation of 
glycoengineered yeast, J. Biotechnol. 155 (2011) 217–224. 
[82] C. Arnau, C. Casas, F. Valero, The effect of glycerol mixed substrate on the 
heterologous production of a Rhizopus oryzae lipase in Pichia pastoris system, 
Biochem. Eng. J. 57 (2011) 30–37. 
[83] M. Jahic, F. Wallberg, M. Bollok, P. Garcia, S. Enfors, Temperature limited fed-batch 
technique for control of proteolysis in Pichia pastoris bioreactor cultures, Microb. 
Cell Fact. 2:6 (2003). 
[84] X. Garcia-Ortega, N. Adelantado, P. Ferrer, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, A step 
forward to improve recombinant protein production in Pichia pastoris: From specific 
growth rate effect on protein secretion to carbon-starving conditions as advanced 
strategy, Process Biochem. 51 (2016) 681–691. 
[85] J. Hemmerich, N. Adelantado, J. Barrigón, X. Ponte, A. Hörmann, P. Ferrer, F. Kensy, 
F. Valero, Comprehensive clone screening and evaluation of fed-batch strategies 
in a microbioreactor and lab scale stirred tank bioreactor system: application on 
Pichia pastoris producing Rhizopus oryzae lipase, Microb. Cell Fact. 13 (2014) 36. 
[86] m2p-labs | Microbioreactors, (2017). http://www.m2p-labs.com (accessed June 22, 
2017). 
[87] J. Růžička, E.H. Hansen, Flow injection analysis. principles, applications and trends, 
Anal. Chim. Acta. 114 (1989) 19–44. 
[88] K. Schügerl, Progress in monitoring, modeling and control of bioprocesses during 
the last 20 years., J. Biotechnol. 85 (2001) 149–173. 
[89] M. Trojanowicz, K. Kołacińska, Recent advances in flow injection analysis, Analyst. 
141 (2016) 2085–2139. 
[90] J. Ruzicka, G.D. Marshall, Sequential injection: a new concept for chemical sensors, 
process analysis and laboratory assays, Anal. Chim. Acta. 237 (1990) 329–343. \n\n 
 
 40 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
[91] A. Surribas, O. Cos, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, On-line monitoring of the methanol 
concentration in Pichia pastoris, Biotechnol. Lett. 25 (2003) 1795–1800. 
[92] R. Luttmann, D.G. Bracewell, G. Cornelissen, K. V. Gernaey, J. Glassey, V.C. Hass, 
C. Kaiser, C. Preusse, G. Striedner, C.F. Mandenius, Soft sensors in bioprocessing: 
A status report and recommendations, Biotechnol. J. 7 (2012) 1040–1048. 
[93] S. Sivakesava, J. Irudayaraj, D. Ali, Simultaneous determination of multiple 
components in lactic acid fermentation using FT-MIR, NIR, and FT-Raman 
spectroscopic techniques, Process Biochem. 37 (2001) 371–378. 
[94] J. Crowley, B. Mccarthy, N.S. Nunn, L.M. Harvey, B. McNeil, Monitoring a 
recombinant 
Pichia pastoris fed batch process using Fourier transform mid-infrared 
spectroscopy (FT-MIRS), Biotechnol. Lett. 22 (2000) 1907–1912. 
[95] J. Crowley, S.A. Arnold, N. Wood, L.M. Harvey, B. McNeil, Monitoring a high cell 
density recombinant Pichia pastoris fed-batch bioprocess using transmission and 
reflectance near infrared spectroscopy, Enzyme Microb. Technol. 36 (2005) 621–
628. 
[96] M. Goldfeld, J. Christensen, D. Pollard, E.R. Gibson, J.T. Olesberg, E.J. Koerperick, 
K. Lanz, G.W. Small, M.A. Arnold, C.E. Evans, Advanced near-infrared monitor for 
stable real-time measurement and control of Pichia pastoris bioprocesses, 
Biotechnol. Prog. 30 (2014) 749–759. doi:10.1002/btpr.1890. 
[97] M.L. Fazenda, J.M.L. Dias, L.M. Harvey, A. Nordon, R. Edrada-Ebel, D. Littlejohn, B. 
McNeil, Towards better understanding of an industrial cell factory: investigating the 
feasibility of real-time metabolic flux analysis in 
Pichia pastoris, Microb. Cell Fact. 
12 (2013) 51. 
[98] B. Warth, G. Rajkai, C.F. Mandenius, Evaluation of software sensors for on-line 
estimation of culture conditions in an Escherichia coli cultivation expressing a 
recombinant protein, J. Biotechnol. 147 (2010) 37–45. 
[99] M. Aehle, A. Kuprijanov, S. Schaepe, R. Simutis, A. Lübbert, Simplified off-gas 
analyses in animal cell cultures for process monitoring and control purposes, 
Biotechnol. Lett. 33 (2011) 2103–2110. \n\n 
 
 41 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
[100] J.M. Barrigon, R. Ramon, I. Rocha, F. Valero, E.C. Ferreira, J.L. Montesinos, State 
and Specific Growth Estimation in Heterologous Protein Production by Pichia 
pastoris, AIChe J. 58 (2012) 2966–2979. 
[101] C.J. Franzén, Metabolic flux analysis of RQ-controlled microaerobic ethanol 
production by Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Yeast. 20 (2003) 117–132. 
[102] P.L. Lee, G.R. Sullivan, Generic model control (GMC), Comput. Chem. Eng. 12 (1988) 
573–580.  
[103] M. Jenzsch, R. Simutis, A. Luebbert, Generic model control of the specific growth 
rate in recombinant Escherichia coli cultivations, J. Biotechnol. 122 (2006) 483–
493. 
[104] M. a. Hisbullah, K.B. Ramachandran, Design of a Fuzzy Logic Controller for 
Regulating Substrate Feed to Fed-Batch Fermentation, Food Bioprod. Process. 81 
(2003) 138–146. 
[105] J.M. Modak, H.C. Lim, Y.J. Tayeb, General characteristics of optimal feed rate 
profiles for various fed-batch fermentation processes, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 28 
(1986) 1396–1407. 
[106] S. Park, W.F. Ramirez, Optimal Production of Secreted Protein in Fed-Batch 
Reactors, AIChe J. 34 (1988) 1550–1558. 
[107] M.A. Oberhardt, B.Ø. Palsson, J.A. Papin, Applications of genome-scale metabolic 
reconstructions, Mol. Syst. Biol. 5 (2009) 1–15. 
[108] K. V. Gernaey, A.E. Lantz, P. Tufvesson, J.M. Woodley, G. Sin, Application of 
mechanistic models to fermentation and biocatalysis for next-generation 
processes, Trends Biotechnol. 28 (2010) 346–354. 
[109] J.M. Barrigon, F. Valero, J.L. Montesinos, A macrokinetic model-based comparative 
meta-analysis of recombinant protein production by 
Pichia pastoris under AOX1  
promoter, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 112 (2015) 1132–1145. 
[110] M. Maurer, M. Kühleitner, B. Gasser, D. Mattanovich, Versatile modeling and 
optimization of fed batch processes for the production of secreted heterologous \n\n 
 
 42 
 
1. Introduction Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
proteins with Pichia pastoris, Microb. Cell Fact. 5:37 (2006). 
[111] W. Zhang, C.P. Liu, M. Inan, M.M. Meagher, Optimization of cell density and dilution 
rate in Pichia pastoris continuous fermentations for production of recombinant 
proteins, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 31 (2004) 330–334. 
[112] H. Ren, J. Yuan, Model-based specific growth rate control for Pichia pastoris to 
improve recombinant protein production, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 80 (2005) 
1268–1272. 
[113] K. Kobayashi, S. Kuwae, T. Ohya, T. Ohda, M. Ohyama, K. Tomomitsu, High level 
secretion of recombinant human serum albumin by fed-batch fermentation of the 
methylotrophic yeast, Pichia pastoris, based on optimal methanol feeding strategy, 
J. Biosci. Bioeng. 90 (2000) 280–288. 
[114] P.M. Bapat, N.U. Padiyar, N.N. Dave, S. Bhartiya, P.P. Wangikar, S. Dash, Model-
Based Optimization of Feeding Recipe for Rifamycin Fermentation, AIChe J. 52 
(2006) 4249–4257. 
[115] X. Gao, D.P. Shi, X.Z. Chen, Z.H. Luo, Three-dimensional CFD model of the 
temperature field for a pilot-plant tubular loop polymerization reactor, Powder 
Technol. 203 (2010) 574–590. 
[116] P. Dama, J. Bell, K.M. Foxon, C.J. Brouckaert, T. Huang, C.A. Buckley, V. Naidoo, D. 
Stuckey, Pilot-scale study of an anaerobic baffled reactor for the treatment of 
domestic wastewater, Water Sci. Technol. 46 (2002) 263–270. 
[117] P. Rohe, D. Venkanna, B. Kleine, R. Freudl, M. Oldiges, An automated workflow for 
enhancing microbial bioprocess optimization on a novel microbioreactor platform, 
Microb. Cell Fact. 11 (2012) 144. 
 
 \n\n 
 
 43 
 
2. Objectives Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
2. OBJECTIVES 
The main aims that have been pursued by the consecution of this thesis are summarized 
here. In a general point of view, enhancing the bioprocess efficiency in the production of 
a lipase from Rhizopus oryzae (ROL) expressed in Pichia pastoris under the control of 
PAOX1, using proper operational strategies with methanol as a sole carbon source and 
inducer. This objective can be divided into the following points: and in 
• Enhancing the supervision, monitoring and control of this bioprocess carried out 
in a 5 L bench-top bioreactor, by the communication of new monitoring hardware 
and building easy-to-use, versatile and automatic applications for feeding 
strategies.  
• To evaluate and characterize the influence of the oxygen tension on the 
bioprocess efficiency, so that to be able to deal with limitations it offers in a wide 
range within normoxic conditions.  
• By the implementation of off-gas analyzers in fed-batch mode, experimental 
validation is sought by the elemental balances calculations and the  
• The optimization of feeding strategies in bench-top scale, as one of the main 
pillars of this dissertation. With that, top levels of ROL bioprocess efficiency are 
sought in terms of the performance indexes of industrial interest. 
• Finally, the change of scale of this process is sought in both ways, up to a pilot 
scale and to microbioreactor system. The consecution of this objective is not 
straightforward, due to the need to deal with a bioprocess based on methanol 
feeding strategies, a very volatile substrate, as well as very high oxygen-
demanding.  
 
 
 
 
 \n\n 
 
 44 
 
2. Objectives Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 \n\n3.  
 
 4
5 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
3 P RELIMINAR RESULTS: Pichia pastoris PRODUCING Rhizopus oryzae LIPASE 
UNDER P AOX1  CONTROL. FIRST STEPS TO THE OPTIMIZATION OF 
BIOPROCESS EFFICIENCY 
3.1 Introduction. First step process improvements in bench-top bioreactor fermentation 
Previously to (and during) the following systematic studies to accomplish the main objective of this dissertation, some 
considerations were taken into account in a way to implement some improvements regarding, in one hand, monitoring 
and supervising of the system, but also about the feeding strategy used for the supplying of nitrogen source. With 
that, reproducibility and system robustness are expected to be improved.  
3.1.1 S tirred-tank bioreactors  
First of all, the aim of this section is to present the main equipment that has been exploited to cultivate P. pastoris for 
the experiments proposed for this PhD dissertation. 
A total of three commercial stirred-tank bioreactors have been used: two bench-top and a pilot scale one. This last 
one belongs to the service Planta Pilot de Fermentació (Department of Chemical, Biological and Environmental 
Engineering, UAB, Barcelona, Spain). Their main geometric features, as well as general operation and instrumentation 
characteristics, are listed in Table 3.1.  
 
 
 
Figure 3.1 G eneral lay-out of bench-top bioreactors supplied by the manufacturing companies. On the left, a scheme of ez-Control 
BioBundle 7L (Applikon). On the right, Biostat B 5L bioreactor for microbial cultures (Sartorius). \n\n3.  
 
 46 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish 
Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Table 3.1 M ain geometric and general operation features of the bioreactors that have been used in this PhD thesis at the Department of Chemical, Biological and Environmental Engineering (UAB) 
Specification Units Applikon 
ez-Control BioBundle1 Sartorius Biostat B2  Braun Biostat UD2  
Scale - Lab Lab Pilot 
Nominal volume L 7 5 74 
Max. working volume L 4.7 4.3 53 
Min. working volume L 2  2  20  
Inner diameter (DI) m 0.160 0.160 0.315 
Inner height (H) m 0.276  0.341 0.964 
Liquid height (HL) 
(without aeration) 
m 0.235 0.215 0.685 
Ratio HL/D I - 1.5 1.3 2.2 
Impellers - 3 Rushton* 3 Rushton* 3 Rushton* 
Heat exchange system - Jacketed Jacketed Jacketed 
Heat exchange fluid - Water (external 5ºC cold water) Water (external 5ºC cold water) Water (external 5ºC cold water) 
Dissolved oxygen detection - Polarographic Optic Polarographic 
Off-gas composition analysis - 
BlueSens BCPreFerm  
O 2 and CO2 
No No 
Stirring rate range rpm 0-1500 0-2000  0-800 
Aeration rate range L min-1 
0-10 (air) 
0-3 (O2) 
0-10 (air) 
0-5 (O2) 
0-200 (air) 
0-50 (O2) 
Aeration rate instrumentation - Mass flow controllers (MFC) MFC  Rotameters 
Automatic gas mix  - No No Yes (Air-O 2-N2) 
*2 impellers are submerged at initial broth volume 
1 Applikon Biotechnology B.V, Delft, Netherlands. 
2 Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Göttingen, Germany. \n\n3.  
 
 4
7 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
3.1.2 M onitoring, control and supervision of the bioprocess. National Instruments LabVIEW 
LabVIEW (National Instruments, Austin, TX), which stan ds for Laboratory Virtual Instrumentation Engineering 
Workbench is a graphical programming language first released in 1986. It implements a language that differs from 
other ones based on written code, allowing easy conception of new applications and modification of the ones already 
existing. Each function or program is stored as a virtual instrument (VI), and it is structured and hierarchically organized 
in different subvirtual instruments (subVI) [1].  
LabVIEW stands out as a very suitable and versatile platform for bench-top instrumentation and automation, as a tool 
that integrates peripheral communications, manages process flow, executes all kinds of control algorithms and allows 
the continuous data acquisition of any variable of the system being monitored. With that, every node in the flow 
diagram is then present in a front panel, where the user can build and distribute, functionally and aesthetically, an 
organized control panel to rationally supervise the process at real time. In Figure 3.2, it is shown a sample window of 
a small part of the VI that was used for the run of the cultures carried out. 
 
Figure 3.2  S
 ample fragment of the flow-chart code of the program used for monitoring and control of fed-batch processes with 
P. pastoris. Data flows from left to right through the strings. Circled boxes are subprograms (subVI). 
In this part of the VI, and concretely at the up-left zone, a subVI is present (white box), and contains the programming 
for the automatic feeding of methanol according to different feeding modes depending on the strategy that will be 
applied. These modes are one of the set of options that this VI lets the user select. In Figure 3.4, this part of the front 
panel is depicted. 
\n\n3.  
 
 4
8 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 3.3 F ragment of the front panel corresponding to the flow-chart VI present in Figure 3.2. Here, part of the substrates 
feeding control is shown. 
 
3.1.2.1 A LabVIEW VI for monitoring and controlling P. pastoris cultures under different feeding strategies 
LabVIEW has been the pillar of the communications, supervision, control and monitoring of P. pastoris fermentations 
carried out by the Bioprocess Engineering and Applied Biocatalysis Group, where the PhD candidate belongs to. 
Labview VI (VI) that was developed and subsequently updated by the previous PhD students O. Cos, R. Ramon and 
J.M. Barrigón [2,3] has been used in the fermentation experiments of all the present dissertation. During the present 
work, several updates have been carried out to this VI and will be listed and detailed in section 3.2.  
The structure of the program is detailed as follows: 
• Peripheral communications 
This VI is programmed to receive and send data from/to Digital Control Units (DCU) from bench-top reactors, in two 
different versions, one for a Biostat B (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Göttingen, Germany) and a Biobundle (Applikon 
Biotechnology B.V, Delft, Netherlands). The PC and the DCU are connected physically by Ethernet, and they 
communicate by an OPC standard protocol, enabling the data flow back and forth through the interaction between 
the OPC server and the client (supplied by the bioreactor company). Within the set of data, it can be found 
temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen (DO), stirring rate, gas flow (air and O2), which are both monitored and controlled. 
In
 Figure 3.4, the communication part of the VI for the DCU is represented, where inlet and outlet data are observed 
going through the subVI built for this communication just mentioned. 
\n\n3.  
 
 4
9 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 3.4  P ortion of the VI where data regarding some of the set-point values (left) are sent to subVI that manages all DCU 
communications (COMUN APPLIKON). On the right, current values of state variables are monitored and further acquired. 
A set of external devices are also connected through  RS-232C connections and send data to the PC via a COM 
communication protocol. Among them, there is the Methanol Sensor System (Raven Biotech, Vancouver, Canada), 
which can monitor methanol concentration along the process, and 2 microburettes (Hach Lange Spain, Barcelona, 
Spain) that can work, parallelly, as the driving element of the feeding solutions intended to be introduced in the vessel.  
• Inlet data. Control, supervision of the process and constraints  
Within this section, set points of all controls of state variables (and their tuned and physiologic parameters) are 
included, as well as specifications of communication protocols: 
a. COM port for methanol sensor and each microburette.  
b. IP address for DCU interaction.  
Calibration values of the methanol sensor are also required and can be changed in situ for recalibration, just like the 
frequency that data acquisition is settled, stablished as 60 s by default.  
More specifically, controls regarding feeding strategies, or what is the same, those ones using feeding rate as the 
manipulated variable, are listed followingly, and coincide with the different feeding modes that are available in the VI:  
a. Constant feeding rate (F)  
b. Closed-loop control of methanol concentration (
S) 
This option is exclusive for a methanol feeding strategy, applied then only for strains expressing RPP under PAOX  
promoters (all Mut phenotypes). It is based on a predictive-PI control law to maintain the desired levels of methanol 
concentration, following what Equation 3.1 describes. This coupled control strategy enables to minimize problems 
from tuning (PI) and, at the same time, overcome uncertainties or mismatches from the kinetic model (predictive, 
Equation 3.2) [2,3]. 
\n\n3.  
 
 5
0 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 ≈  − 
	
 − 	
	
 +    + 1

   


 
Equation 3.1 
The first-time derivative of S from Equation 3.1 Is obtained through spline-smoothed online time intervals and is 
constrained according to Equation 3.2: 
0 ≥ 	
 ≥ − 1
/!
∗  #$%& '( exp, #$%&-  
Equation 3.2  
Where µmax stands for the maximum specific growth rate (h-1) and X0 (g L-1) is the concentration at the moment when 
t
he control is turned on. 
c. Open-loop control of specific growth rate (µ) 
As mentioned in chapter 1 (Equation 1.1), this control allows the consecution of a constant specific growth rate at 
substrate-limited conditions using a pre-programmed exponential feeding strategy, without requiring any measured 
variable. This control is applicable to any substrate, in addition to methanol, and can be also paired to the closed-loop 
control by the use of two microburettes at the same time. This is a common practice in Muts phenotype cultures, which 
u
sually grow from the assimilation of mixed C-substrates [4].  
• Data acquisition 
All inlet and outlet variables are automatically stored (every 60 seconds by default) in two files, in order not to lose 
data in case of a sudden shut down of the system. Selected variables are also plotted for the user to supervise the 
process at any time.  
 
Figure 3.5 B ench-top bioreactor (Biostat B) full equipment to produce RPP by Pichia pastoris. From left to right, a microburette, 
the vessel of the bioreactor, the DCU and the PC for supervision, control and data acquisition. 
 
\n\n3.  
 
 5
1 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
3.2 LabVIEW  VI upgrades  
In order to fulfill particular process needs, both fo r this dissertation and other ones, several new implementations have 
been proposed and put to practice 
3.2.1 N ew device communications 
• O 2 / CO2 sensors for CER/OUR and elemental balances estimati on in fed-batch cultures   
Two BCPreFerm optic detectors (BlueSens gas sensor GmbH, Herten, Germany; Figure 3.6) were installed for the 
detection of O2 and CO2 fractions in the off-gas of the fermenter. With tha t, carbon dioxide evolution rate (CER) and 
oxygen uptake rate (OUR) can be obtained for physiologic characterization and also for the calculation of elemental 
balances. In this case, and specifically in chapter 4, carbon (CB) and degree of reduction (or electron, EB) balances 
were applied for validating experimental results through a consistency check and reconcile the physiologic 
parameters obtained.  
The connection was stablished as an additional outlet variable coming from the DCU through OPC. As the signal from 
both sensors comes as a raw % of maximum intensity, a linear relationship between the signal and the value of each 
gas fraction was chosen, by including two input values (slope and offset) for calibration in the VI, which could be even 
changed at any time during the process.  
 
Figure 3.6  B
 CPreFerm O 2 or CO2 analyzer 
Additionally, an O2 Maihak S710 analyzer (Sick AG, Waldkirch, Germany) w as available in the facilities and was 
communicated to the VI by a RS-232C connection and intended to use as a backup. Apart, no inner calibration inputs 
were needed to be included for this device, as it is calibrated externally.  
3.2.2 N ew feeding strategies. Complementary addition and closed-loop control of methanol concentration 
profiles 
The upgrades in this section were necessary for the operation of the cultures of the following chapters of the 
dissertation, or at least part of them.  
In the first place, complementary addition mode was implemented for the second microburette (right panel from 
Equation 3.3), for specific bioprocess needs of nitrogen source (N-source), which will be further detailed in section 
3.3. Despite the specificity of the application, this mode was conceived as versatile, and consisted as a continuous 
inlet feeding rate that is automatically calculated from the first microburette feeding rate at any time of the bioprocess. 
This is especially useful for substrates that need to be supplied by their stoichiometrically dependence to the limiting 
\n\n3.  
 
 5
2 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
substrate. For that purpose, two inlet parameters ar e required: the relationship between the two substrates, 
represented as a yield in mass units (YA/B), being A the supplementary substrate, and B the li miting one), and the 
concentration of the substrate in the feeding solution.  
Furthermore, and for different reasons, which will be thoroughly explained in chapter 5, a significant modification was 
performed to the closed-loop control mode. A versatile application was built to implement methanol concentration 
profiles, in the way that the user has the option of introducing a preset S profile that would last a determined amount 
of time, and so the controller is capable of periodically updating the set point of S to accomplish the requirements. 
For performing this, a set of inlet parameters have been included: 
• Scalars A, B, C and D, which characterize the profile of S in function of time (t, hours), following a polynomial 
function, as Equation 3.3 shows: 
	!, - = / 0 + 12 + 3 + 4 
Equation 3.3 
• T ime interval of the SSP change, in minutes. By default, it is set to 30 min , and it is recommended to be higher 
than the methanol sensor time response (5 min to reach the 90 % of the maximal signal).   
Apart from these features, for further needs of hypothetical processes and enhancing higher versatility of this mode, 
it would be convenient to implement a function that can stop the feeding control or when the set final time of the S 
profile is finished, or to be able to input alternative functions for the building of profiles, e.g. exponential.   
At Figure 3.7, the part of this new feeding mode within the VI is represented. 
 
Figure 3.7 L oop for the update of methanol set point (“Metset” in the image). Inside the True/False box (or if loop), the SSP  for a 
given time is calculated and then sent to the subVI of the closed-loop S control.  
3.2.3 P redictive–PI adaptive gain control of methanol concentration 
An improved version of the methanol closed-loop was incorporated to the system, by adding a component of adaptive 
control to the PI element. By doing so, the parameters KP and τI can be updated online so that the control is able t o 
\n\n3.  
 
 5
3 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
adapt to the system dynamics, that is, estimated vol ume changes and current substrate concentration. Thus, the 
Predictive-PI adaptive gain control strategy was adapted from what is described elsewhere [3], that can be also 
derived from the general model control (GMC) theory, as the following equation escribes: 
 ≈  − 
	
 − 	
	
 +   · 
	
 − 	  + 1

   


 
Equation 3.4  
This upgrade was implemented to prevent the system f rom instabilities of the controlled variable and major 
discordances from its set point, mostly in those processes where SSP is not constant and, so, a quick response is 
r
equired from the system. Therefore, this control strategy was used for experiments carried out in chapter 5 and its 
effectiveness is accomplished.  
3.3 Stablishing a N-source systematic feeding strategy to seek reproducibility 
3.3.1 A ntecedents and objectives 
Bioprocess operational strategies are governed by th e limiting substrate, which corresponds, most commonly, to the 
carbon source. However, the lack or the excess of other substrates and accumulation of some products (inside or 
outside the cell), can trigger metabolic responses that may bring the system to unexpected perturbances and 
undesired behavior, lower the product quality and/or bioprocess efficiency. The effect of those situations has been 
thoroughly studied during last decades, and will not be reviewed here. 
Nitrogen, as the commonly third macroelement (in dry cell), plays a main role in any culture, as a prime element for 
the synthesis of main biomolecules as amino acids, proteins, and nucleic acids. 
The aim of this process modification is to outcome process limitations that could be due to the particular way of the 
nitrogen source to be introduced, as well as to improve the reproducibility of experiments. 
Specifically, in operation of a P. pastoris cultivations using a MNLFB strategy, during the three phases of the process, 
i.e. the glycerol batch (GBP), the transition phase (TP), and the methanol induction phase (MIP), nitrogen is supplied to 
the cells by feeding solutions of NH4OH (GBP, also for pH control) and NH4Cl (TP and MIP, where pH is adjusted with 
K
OH). This change of nitrogen source during operation is motivated by the interaction that the NH3 evaporating from 
t
he fed aqueous NH4OH with the methanol sensor, which compromises the g ood performance of its control. The 
alternative proposed by Arnau et al. (2011) [4] for a mixed substrate Muts culture is NH4Cl to be introduced alongside 
g
lycerol in the same solution. However, for those cultures where the only substrate fed is methanol, NH4Cl was not 
p
ossible to be dissolved at the desired concentrations, and diluting the methanol feeding solution would have 
compromised the bioprocess efficiency. Barrigon et al. (2013) [3], who worked with Mut+ strains, introduced manual 
p
ulses of NH4Cl (40 g of ammonium chloride in a 200 g L-1 solution, implying an approximately final concentra tion of 
15-20 g NH4Cl per liter of broth) when the cultures reached val ues of biomass concentration (X) of approximately 30-
35 g L-1 and 50-60 g L-1 of dry cell weight. This boosts ammoniacal nitrogen  (N-NH4) concentrations up to high levels, 
and this sudden shock of ionic force could cause stress to the cells, as it will be appreciated followingly. \n\n3.  
 
 5
4 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
3.3.2 M aterials and methods 
3.3.2.1 Strain 
The wild type P. pastoris X-33 strain containing the vector pPICZαROL was used for the heterologous expression of 
Rhizopus oryzae lipase under the control of the PAOX1  (Mut+ phenotype) [5]. 
3.3.2.2 Inoculum preparation 
Inocula for bioreactor were cultured in 1 L baffled shake flasks at 30 °C, 150 rpm (HT Multitron incubator, Infors AG, 
Bottmingen, Switzerland), for 24 hours, in YPD medium (10 g of yeast extract, 20 g of peptone, 20 g of D-glucose and 
500 µg of zeocin per liter of distilled water, initial pH 7.4). The already grown culture was centrifuged at 4500 x g and 
the cells were re-suspended in bioreactor culture medium and used to inoculate the 5 L Applikon Biobundle 
bioreactor. Initial fermentation volume was 2 L and OD600  close to 2.5. 
3.3.2.3 Fed-batch bioreactor cultivation  
The basal salts medium contained, per liter of distilled water: H3PO 4 (85%) 26.7 mL, CaSO4 0.93 g, K2SO 4 18.2 g, 
M
gSO 4·7H2O 14.9 g, KOH 4.13 g, glycerol 40 g, 2 mL of biotin solution (20 mg L−1), 5 mL of trace salts solution and 
0
.5 mL of antifoam agent (A6426, Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, USA). Trace salts solution was composed, per liter 
of distilled water, of CuSO4·5H2O 6.0 g, NaI 0.08 g, MnSO4·H2O 3.0 g, Na2MoO 4·2H2O 0.2 g, H3BO 3 0.02 g, 
C
oCl2 0.5 g, ZnCl2 20.0 g, FeSO4·7H2O 65.0 g, biotin 0.3 g, H2SO 4 98% 5 mL.  
T
he whole fermentation process consisted of three stages: 
• Glycerol batch phase (GBP) 
During this stage, pH was controlled by adding NH4OH 30% (v/v) and dissolved oxygen (DO) was kept high er than 
25% air saturation, by regulating the stirring rate between 600-1000 rpm, and introducing 1 vvm of air.  
• Transition phase (TP) 
A pre-programmed glycerol feeding rate under carbon limited conditions and methanol feeding rate stepwise 
increased were applied to assure a methanol concentration lower than inhibitory concentration to favor the 
derepression of P
AOX1 . This consisted on a 5 h fed batch stage as previously described [6]. Glycerol (50 % w/w with 5 
mL of trace salts solution and 2 mL of biotin solution per liter) and pure methanol (with 5 mL of trace salts solution and 
2 mL of biotin solution per liter) solutions were used as feeding. pH was controlled by the addition of KOH 5 M during 
both this phase and the next one. DOSP was, as well, kept at 25 %.  
• M
ethanol induction phase (MIP)  
The cells grew under methanol non-limited conditions; where methanol concentration was controlled throughout this 
stage at 3 g L-1, previously described as optimal substrate concentr ation [3]. Methanol feed solution contained 5 mL 
of trace salts solution and 2 mL of biotin solution per liter of pure methanol. DO was kept at 25 % air saturation, 
controlled by a cascade-based control scheme, which involved regulating both stirring rate between 800 and 1000 
rpm and total inlet gas flow rate of air and additional pure oxygen in a range of 0-1 vvm. Nitrogen needs were fulfilled, 
for FBN1, by a pulse of 200 mL of a 200 g L-1 solution of NH4Cl. For the rest of the options (FBN2 and FBO259), a  
continuous feed was introduced, according to the yield from methanol, which calculation is explained further in this 
section.  
Temperature was kept at a value of 30 ºC and pH at 5.5 throughout the three phases of the process.  \n\n3.  
 
 5
5 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
3.3.2.4 Methanol determination and control 
Methanol concentration was monitored by the Methanol Sensor System (Raven Biotech Inc., Vancouver, Canada) and 
controlled by performing a predictive-PI control strategy, as described elsewhere [3] 
3.3.2.5 N-NH4+ analysis by colorimetry 
Free ammonia was analyzed through a colorimetric assay performed with an Ammonium cuvette test 2.0 - 47 mg/L 
NH4-N (Hach, Loveland, CO). It is based on an Indophenol  Blue method and it is incubated 15 minutes at room 
temperature, to be then analyzed in a DR3900 spectrophotometer (Hach) with a preset protocol. The samples that 
contained more than 47 mg L-1 of N-NH4+ were diluted to fit in the linear range of the meth
 od.  
3.3.2.6 Dry cell weight analysis 
Biomass concentration was measured as the dry cell weight (DCW) per liter of culture. Culture from each sample was 
centrifuged at 4500 x g for 5 minutes. The pellet was subjected to two cycles of washing with NaCl 0.9 % and 
centrifugation at 4500 g for 5 minutes. Afterwards, the pellet was dried at 105 ºC until constant weight. Determinations 
were performed by triplicate and the relative standard deviation was about 5 %.  
3.3.2.7 Extracellular ROL activity assay 
Culture broth was centrifuged at 10000 x g for 1 min to remove cells. A colorimetric assay was performed in a Cary 
Varian 300 spectrophotometer (Varian Inc., Palo Alto, USA) at 30 ºC and pH 7.25 (400 mM Tris-HCl + 10 mM CaCl2 
b
uffer) using the Roche lipase colorimetric kit (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) at 580 nm for 4 minutes, as previously 
described [7]. RSD was estimated as 5 %. 
3.3.2.8 Calculation of kinetic parameters from macroscopic balances 
Considering the culture to grow under fully aerobic conditions, all macroscopic biochemical reactions can be summed 
up into a black box model described by Equation 3.5Equation 3.1, which represents an oxidative and oxidoreductive 
growth, on a C-molar basis: 
	 + 67/! 
∗ 82 +  9:;/! 
∗ <=0 → /! 
∗ ' + ?67/! 
∗ 382 + /! 
∗ @ 
Equation 3.5 
Where S is set as the limiting substrate that serves both as carbon and energy source; X represents biomass; P, the 
possible products and Y*i/S are global stoichiometric yield respect to substrate.  
Specific rates of each component from Equation 3.5- µ and qi (gi gX- 1 h-1 or moli gX- 1 h-1) - and overall yields are defined 
p
ositive as what the following expressions describe: 
AB = CB
' 
Equation 3.6  
B/D
∗ = CB
CD
= AB
AD
 
Equation 3.7 
Where ri denotes the volumetric conversion rate of element i from Equation 3.5. 
For an ideal stirred tank-reactor, considering conversion rates of biomass formation, substrate uptake and product 
formation, the following mass balance equations for the fed-batch operation can be formulated: \n\n3.  
 
 5
6 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 


  E
'
	
@
F = E
#
A!
A
F ' + E
−G '
 	B − G 	
−G @
F 
Equation 3.8 
Where symbols of each state variable from general bi ochemical reaction equation represent their concentration in g 
L-1 or mol L-1 (of culture broth); V (L) is the culture volume, µ (h-1), the specific growth rate; S i (g L-1), concentration of 
m
ethanol in the feeding solution; F (L h-1), feeding flow rate; Fo (L h-1), outlet flow rate. 
• C
alculation of the nitrogen-carbon source yield (Y*N/S) 
Equation 3.9 is a simplified expression to calculate the value of this yield. 
9/!
∗ = 39,BB − 39,

	IGJKL$
≈ 39,BB − 39,

M! · N !
O
P
 
Equation 3.9 
Where Y*N/S is the NH4Cl yield from methanol (g g-1); C stands for concentration (g L-1); and the subscript N refers to 
N
H4Cl; S, to methanol; I initial and f, final. 
T
his expression assumes that methanol concentration is kept perfectly constant, since the only consumption term 
comes from the feeding rate. The value that was calculated and used for FBN2 strategy was 0.11 g g-1. Once the 
f
easibility of this strategy was demonstrated, it was decided to be applied to the rest of fed-batch cultures of this 
thesis. 
3.3.3 P roposal and implementation 
Following the procedure of Barrigón et al. (2013) [3] regarding the in preliminary studies of this thesis, some MNLFB 
cultures in Pichia pastoris using the same Mut+ strain (see section 3.3.2) were carried out to prod uce Rhizopus oryzae 
lipase (ROL). One of these (FBN1), is represented in Figure 3.8 as the evolution of its specific rates of ROL activity 
production (qP), and methanol uptake (qS) along time of MIP phase. Alongside with FBN1, the evolution of the same 
variables, but for a strategy where NH4Cl is introduced continuously and stoichiometrically  proportionally to the carbon 
source throughout the MIP (FBN2), is also represented. This was achieved by the use of the new “complementary 
addition” mode implemented in LabVIEW, which has been described in section 3.2.2. The details of the requirements 
of this mode for this strategy are present in section 3.3.2. \n\n3.  
 
 5
7 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 3.8 I nduction time evolution of qS (●) and qP (■) for FBN1 (solid lines) and FBN2 (dashed lines). The arrow points out the 
t
ime where the NH4Cl pulse was introduced in FBN1 strategy. 
As observed, FBN1 specific rates experiment a decay in a point that is very close to the start of this phase, and to the 
point of introduction of the pulse of NH4Cl. FBN2 culture, also experiment this fall in produ ction and methanol uptake 
rates, but less dramatically, and they maintain themselves more stable at middle-end point of the process. The 
feasibility is also observed in Table 3.2 where the productivity and mean specific rates of both strategies are shown. 
Comparison is also carried out with another strategy that was proposed for the study of chapter 4, but that is identical 
to FBN2. 
Table 3.2  Process and physiologic parameters ± indicates standard error (SE). 
Parameter Units FBN1 FBN2  FBO25 [8] 
Nitrogen feeding - Pulse Continuous Continuous 
Volumetric 
productivity 
U
 mL-1 h-1 3.42 5.35 5.49 
µmean  h-1 0.029 ± 0.001 0.031 ± 0.001 0.034 ± 0.001 
qP,mean  U g-1 h-1 152 ± 12 239 ± 19 256 ± 22  
 
It can be stated that the strategies that had continuous feeding of NH4Cl were quite reproducible in terms of 
p
roduction, achieving very similar productivities and excreting active ROL at very similar rate, so that brings to think 
that a NH4Cl effect can have an influence on production, given  the excess on the first hours of the MIP. In Figure 3.9 
the profiles of N-NH4 alongside the fermentation have been included, to point out the differences in operation 
between them. 
Induction time (h)
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
qS (g g-1 h-1)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
qP (U g-1 h-1)
0
200
400
600
800
1000\n\n3.  
 
 5
8 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 3.9 T ime evolution of free ammonia nitrogen for FBN1 and FBN2 . 
The first drop in both strategies corresponds to the  TP of each case, where NH4OH has already been shifted to KOH. 
T
hen, a smooth profile of this compound is achieved for FBN2, while the signal in FBN1 is much more unstable, as 
expected. 
3.4 Conclusions 
The consecution of the upgrades that have been detai led in this section set the grounds of the research of this 
dissertation. They contribute to the development of new operational strategies and to the robustness of the system, 
facts that build the firsts steps to bioprocess optimization and, as well, to bring complex operational strategies up to 
a larger scale.  
Concretely, successful control algorithm modifications help to prevent fluctuations on the controlled variable in 
complex operational strategies, which are not empirically easy to predict by biosystems kinetics or modelling,  
Moreover, a bioprocess where nitrogen-source levels are rather constant has been achieved, prevents physiologic 
perturbations, as its smooth conditions avoid fluctuations, being themselves easily reproducible to other scales. 
Time (h)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
N-NH4 (g L-1)
0
2
4
6
8
10\n\n3.  
 
 5
9 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
3.5 References 
[1] C. Elliott, V. Vijayakumar, W. Zink, R. Hansen, National Instruments LabVIEW: A Programming Environment for 
Laboratory Automation and Measurement, J. Assoc. Lab. Autom. 12 (2007) 17–24. 
[2] O. Cos, R. Ramon, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, A Simple Model-Based Control for Pichia pastoris Allows a More 
Efficient Heterologous Protein Production Bioprocess, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 95 (2006) 145–154. 
[3] J.M. Barrigón, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, Searching the best operational strategies for Rhizopus oryzae lipase 
production in Pichia pastoris Mut+ phenotype: Methanol limited or methanol non-limited  fed-batch cultures?, 
Biochem. Eng. J. 75 (2013) 47–54. 
[4] C. Arnau, C. Casas, F. Valero, The effect of glycerol mixed substrate on the heterologous production of a 
Rhizopus oryzae lipase in Pichia pastoris system, Biochem. Eng. J. 57 (2011) 30–37. 
[5] O. Cos, A. Serrano, J.L. Montesinos, P. Ferrer, J.M. Cregg, F. Valero, Combined effect of the methanol utilization 
(Mut) phenotype and gene dosage on recombinant protein production in Pichia pastoris fed-batch cultures., J. 
Biotechnol. 116 (2005) 321–335. 
[6] S. Minning, A. Serrano, P. Ferrer, C. Solà, R.D. Schmid, F. Valero, Optimization of the high-level production of 
Rhizopus oryzae lipase in Pichia pastoris, J. Biotechnol. 86 (2001) 59–70. 
[7] D. Resina, A. Serrano, F. Valero, P. Ferrer, Expression of a Rhizopus oryzae lipase in Pichia pastoris under 
control of the nitrogen source-regulated formaldehyde dehydrogenase promoter, J. Biotechnol. 109 (2004) 
103–113. 
[8] X. Ponte, J.L. Montesinos-Seguí, F. Valero, Bioprocess efficiency in Rhizopus oryzae lipase production by Pichia 
pastoris under the control of PAOX1  is oxygen tension dependent, Process Biochem. 51 (2016) 1954–1963. 
 \n\n3.  
 
 6
0 
 
3. Preliminary results Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 \n\n4.   
 
 
 61 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
4  BIOPROCESS EFFICIENCY IN Rhizopus oryzae LIPASE 
PRODUCTION BY Pichia pastoris UNDER THE CONTROL 
OF P AOX1 IS OXYGEN TENSION DEPENDENT 
This chapter has been published as a research paper in the journal Process Biochemistry: 
X. Ponte, J.L. Montesinos-Seguí, F. Valero, Bioprocess efficiency in Rhizopus oryzae lipase production by 
Pichia pastoris under the control of PAOX1  is oxygen tension dependent, Process Biochem. 51 (2016) 1954–
1963. 
4.1  Introduction 
Fed batch is the most common operating mode to achieve high productivities of 
heterologous protein. Recently, a large number of operational strategies have been tried 
and developed in P. pastoris recombinant protein production under different promoters, 
based on the limitation of substrates or other state variables as temperature [1-3]. One of 
the most used options with PAOX1, due to its simplicity, as stated in chapter 1, consists on 
growing the cells in methanol limited cultures (MLFB), where a constant specific growth 
rate (µ) is maintained by the action of an open loop control [4]; therefore, no online 
methanol measuring is required. However, recent studies proved this strategy to be in 
clear disadvantage in respect to a methanol non-limited induction (MNLFB) for the case 
of 
Rhizopus oryzae lipase production (ROL) [3], in which an excess of methanol is kept 
along the process. This methodology, however, implies high demands of substrates, even 
more when the cultured strain shows a Mut
+ phenotype, since its maximum specific 
methanol consumption rate (qS,max) is much higher than Muts strains; concretely appointed 
around 4-fold increment when comparing both kinds of phenotypes [5]. 
On the other hand, oxygen stands out as a key substrate to design suitable operational 
strategies, as the growth of P. pastoris under methanol is considerably high oxygen-
demanding, due to the need to fulfill oxidation of methanol to formaldehyde [6]. The 
impact of oxygen supply on the heterologous production has been studied for different 
recombinant production hosts, because the oxygen transfer rate (OTR) is usually one of 
the most limiting bottlenecks for high cell density cultivations of microorganisms [7]. In \n\n4.   
 
 
 62 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Escherichia coli cultivations, oxygen limitation leads to a stress response and by-product 
formation such as acetate, which inhibits both growth and recombinant protein production 
[8,9]. The impact of the oxygen limitation was, as well, studied in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, observing the production of ethanol and glycerol as by-products of the 
cultivation [10]. 
Publications about the effect of oxygen transfer limitation on recombinant protein 
production in P. pastoris, for both PAOX1 and PGAP-based systems, have become more and 
more popular over last years, with studies that evidenced improvements on protein final 
titer and quality or even on specific production rate [11-16]. For instance, in reference to 
DO effects, the highest recombinant glucose isomerase (rGI) titer and specific activity was 
obtained at DO of 15 % under PGAP control [16]. 
The non-limitation by oxygen is evidenced by the positive values of dissolved oxygen 
tension (DO), normally above 30 % air saturation [17-19]. In PAOX1-based systems, the non-
accumulation of methanol, as well as the non-generation of by-products, indicates that 
cells are growing in fully aerobic methanol metabolism (normoxic conditions).  
As a counterpart, some studies have explored the impact of an excess of oxygen supply. 
Concretely, Lee et al. (2002) drastically improved final titer of heterologous protein when 
working at higher DO (30-50 % air saturation) [20], while Jazini et al. (2014) conducted a 
continuous operation with a 70 % set point of DO [21]. Under this condition, final 
productivity was found slightly lower than the one obtained at DO of 25 %. 
Even so, scarce systematic studies have been published about PAOX1-based systems in 
order to identify the optimal DO culture conditions that lead to maximal productivities and 
yields for the protein of interest [18,21]. 
In the present work, a thorough study of a wide range of dissolved oxygen conditions for 
recombinant 
P. pastoris producing ROL under PAOX1 in fed batch cultivations has been 
performed, searching the best conditions to improve bioprocess efficiency, including 
yields and productivities. Thus, the work is not related to oxygen transfer limitation in 
either hypoxic or normoxic conditions when growth is limited by oxygen transfer rate 
(OTR), and so that, when this value is kept constant. In this particular case, OTR changed \n\n4.   
 
 
 63 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
(increased) along the process to keep DO set point values. Systematic and reliable studies 
concerning specific rates comprising cell growth, substrate consumption and product 
formation have been carried out, where consistency test and data reconciliation were 
fulfilled to trustworthily establish the dependency of those parameters to oxygen tension.  
4.2  Materials and methods  
4.2.1 Strain 
The wild type P. pastoris X-33 strain containing the vector pPICZαROL was used for the 
heterologous expression of Rhizopus oryzae lipase under the control of the PAOX1 (Mut+ 
phenotype) [5]. 
4.2.2 Inoculum preparation 
Inocula for bioreactor were cultured in 1 L baffled shake flasks at 30 °C, 150 rpm (HT 
Multitron incubator, Infors AG, Bottmingen, Switzerland), for 24 hours, in YPD medium (10 
g of yeast extract, 20 g of peptone, 20 g of D-glucose and 500 µg of zeocin per liter of 
distilled water, initial pH 7.4). The already grown culture was centrifuged at 4500 x g and 
the cells were re-suspended in bioreactor culture medium and used to inoculate a 5 L 
Applikon Biobundle bioreactor (Applikon Biotechnology B.V., Delft, The Netherlands). 
Initial fermentation volume was 2 L and OD
600  close to 2.5.  
4.2.3  Fed-batch bioreactor cultivation  
The basal salts medium contained, per liter of distilled water: H3PO 4 (85%) 26.7 mL, 
CaSO 4 0.93 g, K2SO 4 18.2 g, MgSO4·7H2O 14.9 g, KOH 4.13 g, glycerol 40 g, 2 mL of biotin 
solution (20 mg L−1), 5 mL of trace salts solution and 0.5 mL of antifoam agent (A6426, 
Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, USA). Trace salts solution was composed, per liter of 
distilled water, of CuSO4·5H2O 6.0 g, NaI 0.08 g, MnSO4·H2O 3.0 g, Na2MoO 4·2H2O 0.2 g, 
H3BO 3 0.02 g, CoCl2 0.5 g, ZnCl2 20.0 g, FeSO4·7H2O 65.0 g, biotin 0.3 g, H2SO 4 98% 5 
mL.  \n\n4.   
 
 
 64 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
The whole fermentation process consisted of three stages, glycerol batch phase (GBP), 
transition phase (TB) and methanol induction phase (MI), as described in chapter 3. 
Particularities of this case of study are detailed followingly: 
• Methanol induction phase (MIP)  
The cells grew under methanol non-limited conditions; where methanol concentration 
was controlled throughout this stage at 3 g L-1, previously described as optimal substrate 
concentration [3]. Nitrogen needs were fulfilled by the addition of NH4Cl solution (200 g 
of NH4Cl, 5 mL of trace salts solution and 2 mL of biotin solution per liter). Its flow rate was 
directly linked to the methanol one and was calculated online, by the previously 
stoichometrically estimated ammonium chloride/methanol yield (Y
*N/S), which was 
established as 0.11 g g-1.  
DO was controlled by a cascade-based control scheme, which involved regulating both 
stirring rate between 800 and 1000 rpm and total inlet gas flow rate of air and additional 
pure oxygen in a range of 0-1 vvm. Four types of experiments were carried out using 
different DO set points (DO
SP) during this phase: 5, 10, 25 and 50 % in respect to air 
saturation (~ 2.3·10-4 mol O 2 L-1). Actual DO conditions differed slightly from those, due to 
the difficulty to maintain DO conditions at the extremes of the experimental DO range. So, 
mean DO values for the cultures were: 7%, 10%, 25% and 45 % differing from the nominal 
DO
SP. 
Temperature was kept at a value of 30 ºC and pH at 5.5 throughout the three phases of 
the process.  
4.2.4  Analytical methods and monitoring 
4.2.4.1  Off-gas analysis 
CO 2 and O2 molar fractions from the off-gas were measured online by BCpreFerm sensors 
(BlueSens gas sensor GmbH, Herten, Germany). The total humid off-gas flow rate was not 
measured directly and it was calculated by inert balance around the reactor. To properly 
estimate this flow rate, determination of its water composition was necessary. It can be 
calculated from the quotient between the off-gas O2 composition without bioreaction, due \n\n4.   
 
 
 65 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
to water stripping, and the corresponding inlet O2 molar fraction. Inlet air composition was 
obtained from a 12 h measurement average before inoculating. Thus, through O2 and CO 2 
balances, estimation of oxygen uptake rate (OUR), carbon dioxide evolution rate (CER), 
and respiratory quotient (RQ) were carried out [22], as well as their corresponding specific 
rates for O2 (qO2) and CO 2 (qCO2 ). A lower residual standard deviation (RSD) than 5 % was 
considered for both online CO2 and O2 molar fractions.  
4.2.4.2  Methanol determination and control 
Methanol concentration was monitored by the Methanol Sensor System (Raven Biotech 
Inc., Vancouver, Canada) and controlled by performing a predictive-PI control strategy, as 
described elsewhere [3]. 
Apart from that, it was also quantified offline by HPLC as previously reported [19]. RSD was 
estimated about 2 %. 
4.2.4.3  
Dry cell weight analysis 
Biomass concentration was measured as the dry cell w eight (DCW) per liter of culture, as 
described in chapter 3. Determinations were performed by triplicate and the relative 
standard deviation was about 5 %.  
4.2.4.4  Extracellular ROL activity assay 
Culture broth was centrifuged at 10000 x g for 1 min to remove cells, and the supernatant 
was subjected to a colorimetric assay at 30 ºC and pH 7.25 (400 mM Tris-HCl + 10 mM 
CaCl
2 buffer) using the Roche lipase colorimetric kit (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) at 580 
nm for 4 minutes, as previously described [23]. RSD was estimated as 5 %. 
4.2.4.5  Protein quantification 
Extracellular protein concentration was determined with the Pierce TM Coomassie 
(Bradford) Protein Assay Kit (Prod. No. 23200, Rockford, IL, USA), according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Bovine serum albumin (BSA) was used as the protein 
standard for the calibration curve. Assays were taken in triplicate and the RSD was about 
5%. \n\n4.   
 
 
 66 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
4.2.5 Calculations 
4.2.5.1 Mass balances and kinetic parameters 
Considering the culture to grow under fully aerobic conditions, all macroscopic 
biochemical reactions can be summed up into a black box model described by Equation 
4.1, which represents an oxidative and oxidoreductive growth, on a C-molar basis: 
 + / 
∗ 
 + / 
∗  → / 
∗  + / 
∗ 
 + / 
∗    
Equation 4 .1 
Where S is set as the limiting substrate that serves both as carbon and energy source; X 
represents biomass; P, the possible products and Y*i/S are global stoichiometric yield 
respect to substrate.  
Specific rates of each component from Equation 4.1- µ and qi (gi gX-1 h-1 or moli gX-1 h-1) - and 
overall yields are defined positive as what the following expressions describe: 
 = 
  
Equation 4 .2 
/
∗ = 

= 

 
Equation 4 .3 
Where ri denotes the volumetric conversion rate of element i from Equation 4.1. 
For an ideal stirred tank-reactor, considering conversion rates of biomass formation, 
substrate uptake and product formation, the following mass balance equations for the 
fed-batch operation can be formulated: 

  
 
!
!
!
" #
#
#

#

#$
%
%
%
&
=
 
!
!
!
"
'



$
%
%
%
&
# +
 
!
!
!
" −)* 
)  − )* 
−)* 

+, # − )* 

−+, # − )* 
$
%
%
%
&
  
Equation 4 .4  \n\n4.   
 
 
 67 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Where symbols of each state variable from general biochemical reaction equation 
represent their concentration in g L-1 or mol L-1 (of culture broth); V (L) is the culture volume, 
µ (h-1), the specific growth rate; Si (g L-1), concentration of methanol in the feeding solution; 
F (L h-1), feeding flow rate; Fo (L h-1), outlet flow rate, which includes sampling and stripping 
losses in case of methanol; OTR (mol L-1 h-1), the oxygen transfer rate; and CTR  (mol L-1 h-
1), the carbon dioxide transfer rate. 
V was calculated afterwards taking into account all terms from total material balance: 
#
 = -.  ) − -/0 )/0 + -123/ )123/ + -4.)4. − - )* + 564
-  
Equation 4 .5 
Where ρi (g L-1) denotes the density of component i and Fi (L h-1) the volumetric flow rate, 
where subscript F refers to feeding; ev , to water that is stripped out of the reactor; base , 
to either NH4OH  or KOH solution for pH control; AF, to antifoam feed solution; o, to outlet 
and, no subscript means feeding for volumetric flow rate and culture broth for density. 
M GAS (g h-1) is the net gas flow rate, defined as the following equation does:  
564 = 7  
8, # − 7 9, #  
Equation 4 .6 
Where W O2 (g mol-1) is O2 molar mass; W CO2 (g mol-1), CO 2 molar mass; OUR  or rO2 (mol L-1 
h-1), oxygen uptake rate; and CER  or rCO2  (mol L-1 h-1), carbon dioxide evolution rate, being 
OUR  and CER  considered equal to OTR  and CTR  respectively. 
Numerical methods used to calculate discrete  and mean specific rates for each 
experiment were as it is specified elsewhere [3], and carried out by the use of Matlab (The 
MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA USA). 
When working at different µ and no significant changes of metabolism are observed 
between conditions, yields associated to growth (intrinsic) and maintenance coefficients 
of each component can be found by the following expression: \n\n4.   
 
 
 68 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 = /
∗  ' = / ' + :/ (7) 
Equation 4 .7  
Where Yi/X (gi gX-1 or moli gX-1) is the intrinsic yield between the i component and biomass 
and m i/X (gi gX-1 h-1 or moli gX-1 h-1), the maintenance coefficient for the i component. 
4.2.5.2 Macroscopic balances, consistency check and data reconciliation 
Macroscopic balances are essential tools to validate experimental data and do not require 
much knowledge about the biochemistry of the system [24]. Y*i/j and qi are usually affected 
by random errors, propagated from inaccuracies of measurements of state variables, 
which may lead to gross errors. 
Concretely, carbon (C-balance) and reduction degree (e-balance) balances were the ones 
used as constraints to perform consistency check of the experimental data. 
µ, qS, qO2 and 
qCO2  were included in the set of measured conversion rates. qP was not considered in this 
procedure instead and no hint of any considerable byproduct was spotted by HPLC 
analysis. Therefore, system was overdetermined when gases specific rates were 
measured and a consistency check could be carried out, summed up in Equation 4.8: 
ℎ =  ? @A? 
Equation 4 .8 
Where h is the statistical parameter that will serve as criteria to stablish whether each of 
measured specific rates contains significant errors from the measurement. ε corresponds 
to the error attributed to each specific rate.  
If h exceeds to the threshold value of χ2-test with a confidence level of 95 %, it is then 
stablished that the specific rate contained too much significant errors for being 
considered within balances calculations. In the case of the present work, mostly every 
data satisfied the conditions imposed in this consistency check.  
Furthermore, a reconciliation data procedure was carried out to all data subjected to the 
check taking into account 
h values of each specific rate and the accomplishment of both 
macroscopic balances. As it is explained in more detail elsewhere [25], new optimal \n\n4.   
 
 
 69 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
specific rates satisfying the black box model were calculated by minimizing the variance 
between measured rates and their corresponding reconciled values, obtaining then a δ 
vector of new estimated errors for each reconciled rate.  
4.3  Results and discussion 
4.3.1  Process performance and general behavior 
The aim of this section is to discuss the performance of the process by showing the results 
achieved with a DO set point of 5 % during the methanol induction, as a case example, 
due to its particularities and more prolonged time of operation when it is compared to the 
rest of the experiments from the set. More concretely, this experiment comes out to be a 
rather representative case to witness how the culture behaved when subjected to 
significant changes of oxygen tension availability.  
In figure 4.1, main state variables are represented versus operation time.  
 
Figure 4 .1 O ffline experimental time profiles of biomass concentration (●), methanol concentration 
(○) and ROL activity (■) for DOSP of 5 %. Online methanol concentration data is also shown by a 
solid line. Biomass and ROL lines are smoothed from the offline data set. (B) batch phase; (T), 
transition phase and (I), induction phase. 
\n\n4.   
 
 
 70 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Biomass profile clearly distinguishes the three different phases of the bioprocess, where 
a fast growth was achieved during glycerol batch phase, a slight decrease of its variation 
was observed at transition phase since methanol was introduced as a carbon source and 
cells still consume glycerol, and finally a progressive decrease that began at the first hours 
of methanol induction phase. This last fact is attributed to both the usage of methanol as 
a sole carbon source and the level of DO, which was the lowest of all the experimental 
set. Methanol concentration was controlled at 3 g L
-1, and so the continuous line denotes 
a good performance of the control system set out for the process, which was also 
validated by offline HPLC measured data. 
Apart from that, as it has been previously mentioned, carbon (C-balance) and degree of 
reduction (e-balance) balances were performed both globally and locally, results being 
gathered in Figure 4.2.  
 
Figure 4 .2 D iscrete balances (carbon ( ○●), degree of reduction ( )) and overall balances (carbon (-), degree of 
reduction (--)) from the induction phase of the culture conducted at DOSP of 5 %. 
 
\n\n4.   
 
 
 71 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
They are quite trustworthy results, as global C-balance only deviated 1 % and e-balance 3 
% from unit. On the other hand, discrete calculations of both balances produced two 
series of points around total accomplishment of balances, which generally deviated within 
± 10 %. Those divergences can be attributed to error propagation, as balances gathered 
up most measured variables together (except for oxygen in the case of C-balance and 
carbon dioxide in e-balance). Another published work presented similar errors when 
performing both C and e-balances from 
P. pastoris culture data [22]. Thus, results 
obtained validated measured data carried out throughout the bioprocess and also 
pointed out no hint of any considerable byproduct, fact that was further corroborated by 
HPLC analysis.  
Data presented from this point and so on has been subjected to a reconciliation 
procedure, as detailed in materials and methods section.  
4.3.2  Yields and specific rates determination and analysis 
Reconciled specific rates of growth (µ), methanol (qS) and oxygen (qO2) uptake, carbon 
dioxide (qCO2 ) production and RQ, as well as their corresponding yields from substrate 
(Y*i/S) are presented in Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.4. 
It must be remarked that data concerning specific production rate (qP) has not been 
included in this reconciliation procedure, due to its non-consideration within the 
contribution to both C and e-balances. Even so, qP is also represented in Figure 4.3A and 
its yield from biomass (Y*P/X ), in Figure 4.4.  
Firstly, what concerns about specific rates, it can be observed from Figure 4.3 that those 
ones considered to contribute to balances suffered a drop from the beginning of the 
induction phase to approximately 20 h later that comprised, more or less, the 50 % of their 
initial value. This should be associated to the adaptation period that cells underwent when 
changing conditions of dissolved oxygen from transition phase (DO
SP of 25 %) to the 
specific ones at the induction stage. Besides, it may also be related to the influence of 
high level expression on cell physiology since ROL secretion appears to impose a 
metabolic burden on P. pastoris affecting negatively at the beginning of the induction 
phase [3]. From that point, saving some smooth fluctuations, those mentioned specific 
rates remained constant until the end of the process. \n\n4.   
 
 
 72 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
 
Figure 4 .3 (A) S pecific growth rate (µ, ●), speciﬁc substrate uptake rate (qs, ○) and specific 
production rate (qP, ■) during time of induction, with a DOSP of 5 %. (B) S pecific oxygen uptake rate 
(qO2, ●), carbon dioxide production rate (qCO2 , ○) and respiratory quotient (RQ, ■) during time of 
induction, with a DOSP of 5 %. 
\n\n4.   
 
 
 73 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 4 .4  Y ields of biomass (Y*X/S, ●), oxygen (Y*O2/S, ○) and carbon dioxide (Y*CO2/S, ) in respect 
to the substrate and product to biomass yield (Y*P/X , □) during induction time of the culture carried 
out under conditions of DOSP of 5 %. 
Moreover, respiratory quotient (RQ) profile, represented in Figure 4.3B, can be considered 
constant during the stage of the process when it was evaluated, including a range of 
values from 0.61 to 0.65, with good agreement to those found from other P. pastoris 
cultures when growing in methanol as a sole carbon source [26,27]. 
Besides, the time evolution of yields along induction phase, shown in Figure 4.4 denoted 
no significant changes on metabolism when the already mentioned adaptation step took 
place, at least when referred to biomass, methanol and gases. This statement is backed 
up by both the facts that no byproducts were detected at significant amounts when 
samples were analyzed by HPLC and the fulfillment of balances all along the induction 
phase that has been previously discussed and represented in Figure 4.2. 
At the same time, and as a counterpart, heterologous production of ROL along the 
induction phase behaved totally different when compared to the rest of state variables, in 
terms of both 
qP and Y*P/X . A sudden drop of those two variables was observed during the 
\n\n4.   
 
 
 74 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
adaptation period and was followed by a progressive recovery. However, this last variable 
described a pronounced spike shortly after the first 20 h of induction.  
The slowdown of the qP suggests that ROL production might be more sensitive to sudden 
changes of oxygen supply. Besides, the calculation of discrete specific rates is made from 
mass balances where first derivatives need to be estimated. Although original data is 
smoothed, the resulting propagated error is significantly higher than for the mean specific 
rates, which are based on linear regression analysis, and in some way possible errors on 
state variables are filtered. This fact may provoke, in addition, some oscillations on 
discrete specific rates and yields, concretely on 
qP and specially on Y*P/X .  
4.3.3  Comparative study on the effect of oxygen tension during induction 
Considering the previous hypothesis that DO level could have a significant role on leading 
P. pastoris to changes on its bioprocess efficiency throughout the range of the study, 
specific growth, consumption and production rates and the relationships that exist 
between them (yields) are set as key physiological parameters to describe this behavior 
[28]. 
4.3.3.1  Influence on specific rates  
In Figure 4.5A, mean specific growth (µmean ), methanol uptake (qS,mean) and ROL production 
(qP,mean ) rates are presented versus the mean level of DO during the induction phase from 
each culture. On the other hand, specific rates regarding the as phase (qO2,mean  and 
qCO2,mean ) are shown along with the mean respiratory quotient (RQ) in figure 5B. 
Global yields are depicted in Figure 4.6. In Table 4.1, mean specific rates are also specified 
for further discussion and comparison. 
 \n\n4.   
 
 
 75 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 4 .5 (A) Mean specific rates for growth (µmean , ●), methanol uptake (qs,mean, ○) and ROL activity 
production (qP,mean , ■) depending on DO level maintained throughout induction phases at the 
different cultures. (B) Mean specific rates for oxygen uptake (qO2,mean ,●) and carbon dioxide 
production (qCO2,mean , ○), with respiratory quotient (RQ, ■) at diﬀerent DO during the induction 
phase. 
\n\n4.   
 
 
 76 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 4 .6 G lobal yields in respect to substrate and biomass (Y*X/S (●), Y*O2/S (○), Y*CO2/S (■), Y*P/X  (□)) 
at different conditions of DO.  
\n\n4.   
 
 
 77 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish 
Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Table 4.1 
. Comparison chart gathering the main process data regarding productivity, growth, consumption and production specific rates, as well as Y*P/X , maximal 
applied OTR and extracellular protein, obtained at different nominal DO values during the induction phase. ± indicates standard error (SE) from regression analysis 
DO SP  % 5  10  25  50  
Final ROL activity  U mL -1 195  315 368 303  
Y
*P/X
  U gX-1 6220 10430  7700  7190  
Total Productivity kU h -1 5.19 9.93 20.3  14.9 
Vol. Productivity U mL -1 h-1 1.97 2.99 5.49 4.60  
µ
mean
 h-1 0.007 ± 0.001  0.013 ± 0.001  0.034 ± 0.001  0.028 ± 0.001  
q
S,mean
  gS gX-1 h-1 0.041 ± 0.004  0.089 ± 0.008  0.181 ± 0.016 0.151 ± 0.013 
q
P,mean
  U gX-1 h-1 43.9 ± 3.8 132 ± 11 256 ± 22 193 ± 17 
q
O2,mean 
 mmol O2 gx-1 h-1 1.70 ± 0.15 3.69 ± 0.32 7.35 ± 0.63  6.16 ± 0.53 
q
CO2,mean 
 mmol C O2 gx-1 h-1 1.05 ± 0.09 2.31 ± 0.20 4.53 ± 0.39  3.81 ± 0.33  
OTR 
≈ OUR
 mmol O2 L-1h-1 49.0  111 265 209 
Extracellular protein
 mg prot L-1 127  166  174  158  \n\n4.   
 
 
 78 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
The recombinant protein produced by P. pastoris has a strong influence on the specific 
methanol uptake rate (qS) as reported by some authors [11,29]. Thus, qS is found between 
0.05 and 0.57 g S gX-1 h-1, and normally it is linearly dependent on the specific growth rate, 
as shown in Figure 4.7 for this work.  
 
Figure 4 .7  Correlation of specific rates (qs,mean (●), qO2,mean  (○), qCO2,mean  (■) and qP,mean (□))  with 
specific growth rate, µmean . Straight lines represent the corresponding correlation in which slope is 
the intrinsic yield and offset, the maintenance coefficient. 
It is quite clear that oxygen tension has an important effect on the behavior of the culture 
in a way that slowed down the specific growth rate when it was brought under a lack of 
this substrate, as expected. Sufficient DO should be maintained because of methanol 
utilization metabolism [30,31]. To assure this, OTR values imposed for 
P. pastoris P AOX -
based  cultures at normoxic conditions (fully aerobic) range typically from 50 to 300 mmol 
L-1 h-1 [15,32]. Actual maximal values for this work are presented in table 1 and fit within the 
normal range applied for Mut+ strains. By contrast, in cases where the operational strategy 
consisted on limiting the culture growth by OTR (DO near 0), this rate presented values 
placed below 50 mmol L
-1 h-1 [13]. Apart from that, commonly OTR applied to P. pastoris 
P GAP-based strains are significantly lower than those for PAOX1 strains [16]. 
The decrease on the specific growth rate was seemingly observed when an excess of 
oxygen was supplied to the culture (DO
SP of 50 %), showing also a decrease on specific 
\n\n4.   
 
 
 79 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
rates of CO 2 production, methanol and oxygen uptake, though less pronounced when 
compared to the opposite end of the DO spectrum.  
4.3.3.2  Analysis on global yields 
Regarding the different global yields, while biomass, oxygen and CO2 ones remained 
constant throughout the DO range tested, Y*P/X  showed a spike-like maximum at DO 10 % 
(Figure 4.6). Besides, despite oxygen limitation including fully a erobic conditions is 
generally regarded as unfavorable [20,27] and supposed to negatively affect the 
expression of foreign genes [33], a maximum of product yield (Y*P/X ) was found at DOSP of 
10 %. This seems consistent with other published works where an increase of product 
yield occurred in conditions of oxygen transfer limitation, facts that are attributed to the 
reduction of either post-translational modifications at low oxygen availability [32] or cell 
lysis [34]. However, this fact does not concur with maximum 
qP,mean  (found at DO around 
25 %, Figure 4.5A), unlike what with a PGAP-driven strain Baumann et al. (2007) [12] and 
Khatri and Hoffmann (2005) [11] with a Mut+ strain respectively found. They achieved 
higher product titers and specific rate in chemostat when working at hypoxic and 
normoxic conditions respectively, both of them under oxygen transfer limiting conditions.  
Furthermore, 
µmean  increase was considerably higher than the Y*P/X  decrease when DO SP 
of 10 % and 25 % are compared (2.5-fold versus 1.4-fold), so that qP,mean  increased. 
Extracellular protein shown in table 1 followed the same trend, within the experimental 
error, as titer achieved expressed as final ROL activity. 
Similar results were found when examining total productivities and titer achieved (Table 
4.1), where the best result was the one obtained at DOSP of 25 %, as well as reported for 
a Mut s strain by Jazini et al. (2014) [21], and the one that corresponds to 10 % was found 
more than 2-fold lower than the optimal one.  
It is also quite remarkable to point out the response of the culture against DO availability 
in terms of mean specific oxygen uptake rate (qO2,mean), represented in Figure 4.5B, which, 
as expected, was lower when approaching conditions of DO limitation (DO of 7-10 %). 
Nevertheless, when bringing the cells under certain excess of oxygen (DOSP of 50 %), 
qO2,mean  decreased as well, and thus a maximal value of this rate was found around a DO \n\n4.   
 
 
 80 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
of 25 %. All of these facts showed qO2,mean  profile versus DO to behave the same way 
qS,mean and µmean  did, and it is contrasted by a nearly invariable Y*O2/S values in all DO range 
tested (figure 4.6).  
qCO2,mean  described an analogue behavior so that a constant profile of RQ was obtained 
(Figure 4.5B). Hence, this indicates that no substantial metabolic changes occurred 
between different conditions of oxygen tension within the spectrum of DO tested.  
This last statement is supported by what is shown in Figure 4.7, where the different mean 
specific rates are represented versus µmean . As the relation between qO2,mean  and µmean  can 
be correlated to a straight line, an intrinsic yield between oxygen and biomass (YO2/X ) is 
maintained in all DO range, and the relatively low maintenance coefficient obtained (m O2,X) 
(table 2) led to a weak dependence of Y*O2/X   to µmean , and, therefore, to DO level (25 % of 
deviation between the maximum and minimum obtained). A similar trend is shown by 
those profiles that refer to methanol uptake and CO2 production. Each intrinsic yield (Yi/X) 
and maintenance coefficient (m i/X) calculated is presented in Table 4.2. 
Table 4 .2 Intrinsic yields (Yi/X) and maintenance coefficients (mi/X) from biomass. ± indicates 
standard error (SE) from regression analysis 
   
YS/X gS gX-1 5.14 ± 0.44  
m S/X  gS gX-1 h-1 0.013 ± 0.010  
YCO2/X   molCO2  gX-1 0.127 ± 0.003  
m CO2/
X 
molCO2  gX-1 h-
1 
(4.0 ± 3.0) ·10-4 
YO2/X  molO2 gX-1 0.206 ± 0.020  
m O2/X  molO2 gX-1 h-1 (6.1 ± 4.6) · 10-4 
YP/X  U gX-1 7220 ± 1240 
m P/X  U gX-1 h-1 12 ± 28 
 
If they are compared to values from previous works [3,35], the results from this work are 
generally 15 % - 25 % lower both regarding Yi/X and m i/X. The reason for YS/X and m S/X 
variations from references are attributed to operational improvements carried out to \n\n4.   
 
 
 81 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
minimize methanol stripping. They mainly consisted on the position of the feed inlet and 
the optimization of the off-gas condensation system. 
The deviation from references turned out to be higher in the case of product, both for YP/X 
and m P/X . Nevertheless, it would be bold to state that qP,mean  and µmean  are not so well 
correlated as a straight line, mainly because of the maximal value of Y*P/X  at DOSP of 10 %, 
which hinted changes on metabolism associated to heterologous protein production.  
In Table 4.3, global yields corresponding to Y*X/S, Y*O2/S, Y*O2/X  and Y*CO2/S  are listed 
together with some representative values from literature for their comparison. Values for 
both Mut+ and Muts strains with methanol as single substrate are included to highlight 
whether phenotype associated differences appeared. It can be observed that global 
yields reached similar values normally attained for other authors. 
However, some results about Y*X/S could be unrealistic or even inconsistent with 
the C-balance owing to potential loss of methanol through the off-gas stream, 
generation of by-products and the presence of large errors in biomass 
determination [29]. 
Y*X/S values about 0.5 g g-1 are common to glycerol or glucose 
uptake. On the other hand, carbon from methanol can be dissimilated in CO2 to a 
ratio of 80% [36], so Y* X/S can be as low as ~ 0.2 g g-1 as a result. 
Accordingly, Y*O2/X  values above ~ 0.09 mol O 2 gbiomass-1 and Y*O2/S close to the value of 
0.047 mol O 2 gS-1, stoichiometric conversion coefficient for the methanol flux to energy 
metabolism (1.5 mol O2 C-molS-1), confirm the oxygen conditions applied are comparable 
between other published works when normoxic environment is kept by maintaining DO > 
5% [26,35,37-39]. 
Complete oxidation of methanol to carbon dioxide would give a Y*CO2/S of 0.031 
mol CO 2 gS-1. Most of the global yields in Table 4.3 are close to this value, thus 
indicating that similar normoxic conditions are attained. Moreover, the lower value 
of Y*X/S, the higher the Y*CO2/S  is, in order to accomplish the C-balance. In a similar 
way, higher values of Y*X/S should be accompanied with lower Y*O2/S if e-balance 
is conserved. \n\n4.   
 
 
 82 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish 
Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Table 4 .3 C omparison of yields from methanol for recombinant protein production processes in 
P. pastoris under the control of P
AOX .  
Phenotype  Product Operational 
strategy µ (h-1) T (ºC) pH Y*X/S 
(g g-1) 
Y*O2/S 
(mol g-1) 
Y*O2/X  
(mol g-1) 
Y*CO2/S  
(mol g.1) Reference  
X33 (Mut +) ROL S = 3 g L-1 0.034 # 30 5.5 0.19 # 0.041 # 0.22# 0.025 # This work 
X33 (Mut +) R OL MLFB 0.020 30 5.5 0.21 0.040 0.19 0.025 [35] 
GS115 (Mut+) scFv S = 3-30 g L-1 0.060-
0.080 30 6.0 0.26 - - - [11] 
YGLY4140  (Mut+) Ig G1 MLFB 0.008 24 6.5 0.30* 0.028 0.09 - [38] 
GS115 (Mut+) 
 
Chymotrypsinogen 
B 
S = 4 g L-1 0.040-
0.075 25-30 3.0-5.5 0.32 0.034 0.11 - [39] 
KM71H (Mut s) 
 
H orseradish 
peroxidase 
Continuous 0.009 28 5.0 0.18-0.27 + - - 0.022-
0.025 [21] 
GS115 (his4) (Muts) Angiostatin MLFB 0.006 30 5.0 0.11 0.042 0.38 0.027 [26] 
CBS7435 (Mut s) H orseradish 
peroxidase 
Pulses MetOH 
1% 0.022 28 5.0 0.38 + 0.033 0.09 0.018 [37] 
# Values at optimal productivity 
*Transformed from WCW to DCW by a factor of 4.2 WCW/DCW [38]. 
+ Biomass elemental composition and ash content [5].  
 \n\n4.   
 
 
 83 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
4.3.3.3  Bioprocess optimization 
In Figure 4.8, evolution of total production of ROL activity (kU) expressed as increments 
from the start of each induction phase (∆(PV)) is displayed.  
 
Figure 4 .8 E volution of incremental total production (∆(PV)) during induction time at each condition 
of DOSP (5 % (●), 10 % (○), 25 % (■) and 50 % (□)). 
As previously stated, the best productivity, estimated from the slope, was achieved when 
working at DO
SP of 25 %. Apart from that, oxygen excess (DOSP of 50 %) turned out to be 
more favorable than limitation, i.e. DOSP of 5 % and 10 %, which behaved more similar to 
each other and their profiles were even superposed during the first hours of induction 
phase.  
Bioprocess efficiency, quantified in terms of yield and productivities at the different DOSP 
studied, is depicted in Figure 4.9.  
\n\n4.   
 
 
 84 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 4 .9 B ioprocess performance criteria: volumetric productivity (QP, black), specific 
production rate (qP, grey) and yield (Y*P/X , white) at different DOSP 
DO around 25 % was found to be the best operating condition for ROL productivity (QP), 
with 4-fold increase in respect to DOSP of 5% and also corresponded with the highest 
specific rate for ROL activity production (qP). However, the highest overall product yield 
(Y*P/X ) was obtained around DO of 10 % with an increase of 45 % when compared with 
maximal DO SP of 50 % studied. Specific production rates and Y*P/X  were lower at the 
extremes of the DO range tested. 
In the case of P. pastoris growth on glycerol or glucose, oxygen limitation has been 
reported to lead to a shift to respiro-fermentative metabolism and the generation of a set 
of by-products such as ethanol, arabitol or succinate [40,41]. However, regarding the 
present case, with methanol as the only carbon source, no by-products were detected 
above the lower limit of detection, fact that was verified by the accomplishment of C-
balances, suggesting that the main effect of the oxygen tension limitation was the 
decrease of all the specific rates. Since all of them are rather linearly correlated with 
µ 
(Figure 4.7), the lower consumption rate of methanol, the lower production rate of ROL is.  
Finally, maximal ROL volumetric productivity attained was similar to the previously 
obtained for MNLFB cultures at 3 g L-1 but with DO about 30 % [7]. On the other hand, 
product to biomass yield and titer were significantly higher (46 % and 31 %, respectively). 
These facts, though, become consistent with the µmean  values obtained for both cases.  
\n\n4.   
 
 
 85 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
4.4  Conclusions 
The results validate that oxygen availability related to DO under normoxic conditions is a 
key parameter to reach higher yields and productivities. Taking into account the results 
obtained, it can be asserted that oxygen tension is a key variable that will allow improving 
the reliability of the system by keeping DO at optimal conditions when 
P. pastoris 
recombinant cultures are induced by methanol. This statement is reinforced when 
realizing that every specific rate slowed down at the right end of DO range, pointing out 
the need to optimize the DO conditions. Therefore, the optimization of this variable is 
required in the case of 
P. pastoris cultures expressing heterologous proteins under the 
control of PAOX1 to maximize production. That statement implies that the general trend of 
simply restricting the DO above 30 %, without control leads to wide variability regarding 
this environmental condition.  
On the other hand, conditions of moderate DO limitation did not favor the bioprocess 
efficiency in terms of substrate uptake, growth and productivity of ROL, establishing the 
optimum around a DO of 25 %. This optimal DO condition represents an improvement on 
ROL productivity about 4-fold higher in respect to the lower DO
 set point investigated of 
5 %. Similarly, at DO of 10 % the product to biomass yield (Y*P/X ) is the highest and an 
enhancement of 45% is reached when compared with maximal DO SP of 50 % studied, a 
condition frequently considered as positive to improve P. pastoris process efficiency.  
In summary, some advantages arise from a practical point of view when moderate DO 
limitation is applied: first, productivity, yield and titer can be optimized controlling oxygen 
tension in the cultures. Second, the specific production rate depends on the specific 
uptake rate, and therefore, also on specific growth rate. Third, processes carried out 
under lower DO conditions require less oxygen transfer capacity, which becomes critical 
in large scale and/or high-density cultures during protein production with methanol, and 
so, reducing the oxygen supply and energy requirements. 
The whole approach followed in this work, since it is systematic and rational based, can 
be applied for the production of different target proteins although their DO optimal values 
may result different from the obtained for the case of ROL.
 \n\n4.   
 
 
 86 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
4.5  References  
[1] M. Jahic, F. Wallberg, M. Bollok, P. Garcia, S.O. Enfors, Temperature limited fed-
batch technique for control of protelysis in Pichia pastoris bioreactor cultures, 
Microb. Cell Fact. 2:6 (2003).  
[2] O. Cos, R. Ramón, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, Operational strategies, monitoring and 
control of heterologous protein production in the methylotrophic yeast Pichia 
pastoris under different promoters: A review, Microb. Cell. Fact. 5:17 (2003). 
[3] J.M. Barrigón, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, Searching the best operational strategies 
for 
Rhizopus oryzae lipase production in Pichia pastoris Mut + phenotype: Methanol 
limited or methanol non-limited fed-batch cultures? Biochem. Eng. J. 75 (2013) 47-
54.  
[4] W. Zhang, M.A. Bevins, B.A. Plantz, L.A. Smith, M.M. Meagher, Modelling Pichia 
pastoris growth on methanol and optimizing the production of a recombinant 
protein, the heavy-chain fragment C of botulinum neurotoxin, serotype A, 
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 70 (2000) 1-8.  
[5] O. Cos, A. Serrano, J.L. Montesinos, P. Ferrer, J.M. Cregg, F. Valero, Combined 
effect of the methanol utilization (Mut) phenotype and gene dosage on recombinant 
protein production in Pichia pastoris fed-batch cultures, J. Biotechnol. 116 (2005) 
321-335. 
[6] J. Jordà, S.S. de Jesús, S. Peltier, P. Ferrer, J. Albiol, Metabolic flux analysis of 
recombinant Pichia pastoris growing on different glycerol/methanol mixtures by 
iterative fitting of NMR-deried 13C-labelling data from proteinogenic amino acids, 
New Biotechnol. 31 (2014) 120-132. 
[7] D. Porro, M. Sauer, P. Branduardi, D. Mattanovich, Recombinant protein production 
in yeasts, Mol. Biotechnol. 31 (2005) 245-257.  
[8] M.A. Eiteman, E. Altman. Overcoming acetate in Escherichia coli recombinant 
protein fermentations. Trends Biotechnol. 24 (2006) 11. \n\n4.   
 
 
 87 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
[9] S.Y. Lee, High cell-density culture of Escherichia coli, Trends Biotechnol. 14:3 (1996) 
98-105. 
[10] M.G. Wiebe, E. Rintala, A. Tamminen, H. Simolin, L. Salusjärvi, M. Toivari, J. T. 
Kokkonen, J. Kiuru, R. Ketola, P. Jouhten, A. Huuskonen, H. Maaheimo, L. Ruohonen, 
M. Penttilä. Central carbon metabolism of 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae in anaerobic, 
oxygen-limited and fully aerobic steady-state conditions and following a shift to 
anaerobic conditions, FEMS 8 (2008) 140-154. 
[11] N.K. Khatri, F. Hoffmann, Impact of methanol concentration on secreted protein 
production in oxygen-limited cultures of recombinant Pichia pastoris, Biotechnol. 
Bioeng. 93:5 (2006) 871-879. 
[12] K. Baumann, M. Maurer, M. Dragosits, O. Cos, P. Ferrer, D. Mattanovich, Hypoxic 
fed-batch cultivation of 
Pichia pastoris increases specific and volumetric 
productivity of recombinant proteins, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 100:1 (2007) 177-183.  
[13] M. Berdichevsky, M. d'Anjou, M.R. Mallem, S.S. Shaikh, T.I. Potgieter, Improved 
production of monoclonal antibodies through oxygen-limited cultivation of 
glycoengineered yeast, J. Biotechnol. 155 (2011) 217-224. 
[14] W.C. Liu, T. Gong, Q.H. Wang, X. Liang, J.J. Cheng, P. Zhu, Scaling-up fermentation 
of 
Pichia pastoris to demonstration-scale using new methanol-feeding strategy and 
increased air pressure instead of pure oxygen supplement, Sci. Rep. 6 (2016) 18439. 
[15] F. Carly, H. Niu, F. Delvigne, P. Fickers, Influence of methanol/sorbitol co-feeding 
rate on p
AOX1  induction in a Pichia pastoris Mut+ strain in bioreactor with limited 
oxygen transfer rate, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 43 (2016) 517-523. 
[16] H. Günes H, P. Çalik. Oxygen transfer as a tool for fine-tuning recombinant protein 
production by 
Pichia pastoris under glyceraldehyde-3-phospate dehydrogenase 
promoter, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 39:7 (2016) 1061-1072. \n\n4.   
 
 
 88 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
[17] A. Surribas, R. Stahn, J.L. Montesinos, S.O. Enfors, F. Valero, M. Jahic. Production of 
a Rhizopus oryzae lipase from Pichia pastoris using alternative operational 
strategies, J. Biotechnol. 130 (2007) 291-299. 
[18] S. Tang, L. Boehme, H. Lam, Z. Zhang Z, Pichia pastoris fermentation for phytase 
production using crude glycerol from biodiesel production as the sole carbon 
source, Biochem. Eng. J. 43 (2009) 157-162. 
[19] C. Arnau, C. Casas, F. Valero, The effect of glycerol mixed substrate on the 
heterologous production of a Rhizopus oryzae lipase in Pichia pastoris system, 
Biochem. Eng. J. 57 (2011O 30.37. 
[20]  C.Y. Lee, S.L. Lee, K.H. Jung K H, Katoh S, Lee E K. High dissolved oxygen tension 
enhances heterologous protein expression by recombinant 
Pichia pastoris. Process 
Biochem. 2003;38:1147-1154. 
[21] M. Jazini, G. Cekici, C. Herwig, Quantifying the effects of frequency and amplitude 
of periodic oxygen-related stress on recombinant protein production in 
Pichia 
pastoris, Bioengineering 1 (2014) 47-61.  
[22] P. Wechselberger, P. Sagmeister, C. Herwig, Model-based analysis on the 
extractability of information from data in dynamic fed-batch experiments, 
Biotechnol. Prog. 29 (2013) 285-296. 
[23] D. Resina, A. Serrano, F. Valero, P. Ferrer, Expression of a 
Rhizopus oryzae lipase in 
Pichia pastoris under control of the nitrogen source-regulated formaldehyde 
dehydrogenase promoter, J. Biotechnol. 109 (2004) 103-113. 
[24] N.S. Wang, G. Stephanopoulos, Application of macroscopic balances to the 
identification of gross measurement errors, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 25:9 (1983) 2177-
2208. 
[25] R.T.J.M. Van der Heijden, J.J. Heijnen, C. Hellinga, B. Romein, K.C.A.M. Luyben, 
Linear constraint relations in biochemical reaction systems: I. Classification of the \n\n4.   
 
 
 89 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
calculability and the balanceability of conversion rates, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 43 
(1993) 3-10.  
[26] J. Xie, R. Yang, Q. Zhou, P. Du, R. Gan, Q. Ye, Efficiencies of growth and angiostatin 
expression in cultures of Pichia pastoris fed with mixed carbon sources, Chem. 
Biochem. Eng. Q. 27:2 (2013) 235-244.  
[27] M.E. Bushell, M. Rowe, C.A. Avignone-Rossa, J.N. Wardell, Cyclic fed-batch culture 
for production of human serum albumin in 
Pichia pastoris, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 82 
(2003) 678-693. 
[28] T. Egli, Microbial growth and physiology: a call for better craftsmanship, Front. 
Microbiol. 6:287 (2015).  
[29] J.M. Barrigón, F. Valero, J.L. Montesinos, A macrokinetic model-based comparative 
meta-analysis of recombinant protein production by Pichia pastoris under AOX1  
promoter, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 112:6 (2015) 1132-1145.  
[30] R. Couderc, J. Baratti, Oxidation of methanol by the yeast Pichia pastoris. purification 
and properties of the alcohol oxidase, Agric. Biol. Chem. 44:10 (1980) 2279-2289. 
[31] A.A. Sibirny, V.I. Titorenko, M.V. Gonchar, V.M. Ubiyvovk, G.P. Ksheminskaya, O.P. 
Vitvitskaya, Genetic control of methanol utilization in yeasts, J. Basic Microbiol. 28:5 
(1988) 293-319.  
[32] O. Trentmann, K.N. Khatri, F. Hoffmann, Reduced oxygen supply increases process 
stability and product yield with recombinant 
Pichia pastoris, Biotechnol. Prog. 20 
(2004) 1766-1775.  
[33] J.L. Cereghino, J.M. Cregg, Heterologous protein expression in the methylotrophic 
yeast Pichia pastoris, FEMS 24 (1999) 45-66. 
[34] T. Charoenrat, M. Ketudat-Cairns, H. Stendahl-Andersen, M. Jahic, S.O. Enfors. 
Oxygen-limited fed-batch process: an alternative control for Pichia pastoris 
recombinant protein processes, Bioprocess Biosyst Eng 27 (2005) 399–406. \n\n4.   
 
 
 90 
 
4. Oxygen tension Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
[35] J.M. Barrigón, R. Ramón, I. Rocha, F. Valero, E.C. Ferreira, J.L. Montesinos. State and 
specific growth estimation in heterologous protein production by Pichia pastoris, 
AIChE J. 58:10 (2012) 2966-2979. 
[36] J. Jordà, P. Jouhten, E. Cámara, H. Maaheimo, J. Albiol, P. Ferrer, Metabolic flux 
profiling of recombinant protein secreting 
Pichia pastoris growing on 
glucose:methanol mixtures, Microb. Cell Fact. 11:57 (2012). 
[37] F.W. Krainer, C. Dietzsch, T. Hajek, C. Herwig, O. Spadiut, A. Glieder, Recombinant 
protein expression in 
Pichia pastoris strains with an engineered methanol utilization 
pathway, Microb. Cell Fact. 11:22 (2012). 
[38] T.I. Potgetier, S.D. Kersey, M.R. Mallem, A.C. Nylen, M. d'Anjou M, Antibody 
expression kinetics in glycoengineered 
Pichia pastoris. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 6 (2010) 
918-927. 
[39] S. Curvers, P. Brixius, T. Klauser, J. Thömmes, D. Weuster-Botz, R. Takors, C. 
Wandrey C. Human chymotrypsinogen B production with 
Pichia pastoris by 
integrated development of fermentation and downstream processing. Part 1. 
Fermentation, Biotechnol. Prog. 17 (2001) 495-502.  
[40]  M. Carnicer, K. Baumann, I. Töplitz, F. Sánchez-Ferrando, D. Mattanovich, P. Ferrer, 
J. Albiol J. Macromolecular and elemental composition analysis and extracellular 
metabolite balances of Pichia pastoris growing at different oxygen levels, Microb. 
Cell Fact. 8:65 (2009). 
[41] X. Liu, B. Jia, X. Sun, J. Ai, L. Wang, C. Wang, F. Zhao, J. Zhan, W. Huang, Effect of 
initial pH on growth characteristics and fermentation properties of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, J. Food Sci. 80 (2015) 800–808. 
 \n\n 
 91 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
5  TOWARDS OPTIMAL SUBSTRATE FEEDING FOR HETEROLOGOUS 
PROTEIN PRODUCTION IN Pichia pastoris FED-BATCH PROCESS 
UNDER P AOX1 CONTROL: A MODELLING AIDED APPROACH  
This chapter has been submitted as a research paper to the journal Processs Biochemistry, with 
the same title. 
5.1 Introduction 
The most common design criteria for bioprocess efficiency are product yield (Y*P/S, g product g-
1 substrate), productivity (QP, g product L-1 h-1) and final titer (PF, g product L-1). Whereas the first 
one is interesting to be boosted in processes of low cost products (high volumes), productivity 
and titer are typically more sought in high-added value ones. Heterologous protein expression 
systems can usually be optimized by using improved strains in combination with an optimal 
engineering strategy avoiding highly complex media in order to reduce costs and facilitate 
downstream processes [1,2]. 
The advances in monitoring and control have contributed to the development of operational 
strategies in fed-batch mode to enhance bioprocess efficiency, involving limitation of process 
variables like methanol and oxygen availability [3–5], which may control kinetic parameters such 
as specific rates of growth, substrate uptake or production.  
The knowledge and characterization of the kinetics of the culture is key to optimize and design 
the proper operational strategy to achieve high product yield and a robust and reproducible 
process. In that way, as stated in section 1, Egli (2015) [6] appointed the control of 
µ to be 
essential for that purpose, by achieving a physiological stability in dynamic cultures as batch 
and fed-batch, which leads to the reproducibility of the process, a fundamental goal in an 
industrial point of view. Methanol limited fed-batch (MLFB) is a clear example of physiological 
control where constant 
µ is maintained throughout the fed-batch culture [7]. This parameter is 
also critical, in some cases, to achieve high titers and good product quality [8], for instance, 
requiring moderate or even low µ to ensure the correct protein folding or to avoid cell stress. In 
that way, specific rate of the secreted protein (qP) vs specific growth rate (µ) is a kinetic \n\n 
 92 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
pontrelationship that is essential to be known. It depends on several genetic and physiological 
factors such as the codon usage of the expressed gene, the gene copy number, efficient 
transcription, translation, processing, folding and degradation in the endoplasmic reticulum and 
secretion out of the cell [2,9]. This relationship needs to be determined empirically in the 
production of recombinant proteins with 
Pichia pastoris because is not predictable a priori [10]. 
Hensing  et al. (1995) [11] discussed about bioprocess optimization depending on several shapes 
of qP in respect to µ for yeasts Hansenula polymorpha and Kluyveromyces marxianus. Looser 
et al. (2015) [8] presented examples of production kinetics, comparing some of them from both 
PAOX1 and PGAP-based cultures, where qP generally increased with µ in PGAP cases, while PAOX1 
strategies mostly described profiles with highest qP at moderate µ [12]. Accordingly, PGAP-based 
systems commonly present a linear dependence between qP and µ [13], and are carried out by 
using pre-programmed feeding profiles to maintain constant values of µ close to the maximum 
to achieve high productions. Besides, Maurer et al. (2006) [14] described a Monod-type model 
for the qP-µ kinetics for the production of an antibody fragment (Fab) under PGAP control.  
However, for systems under PAOX1 control it is even much more challenging to achieve high 
productivity, as high qP at low µ implies high product yield (Y*P/X) and lets the culture reach top 
levels of protein titer before coming across operational limitations caused by high biomass 
concentration, e.g. heat exchange and oxygen transfer as the most common ones. The 
compromise between the desired highest 
qP as possible at moderate µ gives ground to the 
development of new operational strategies in fed-batch mode, where optimal profiles of µ are 
built to maximize design parameters of the process, regarding the production of the desired 
protein.  
Optimization of recombinant protein production processes has been usually carried out by 
finding a solution through the Pontryagin's maximum principle (PMP) [15–17], the Green’s 
theorem [18] or dynamic programming methods [19,20]. Numerical methods can be applied and 
are divided into deterministic and stochastic ones. Commonly, techniques applied to the first 
approach are gradient-based local methods like 
Sequential Quadratic Programming [21]. The 
main disadvantages of these methods are the computing effort and local optima, especially 
when the number of state and control variables increases. Stochastic metaheuristic algorithms, \n\n 
 93 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
belonging to the class of Evolutionary Computation, are used because of their interesting 
performance/computing time ratio, although global optimality cannot be guaranteed. 
Evolutionary algorithms (EA), Differential Evolution and Particle Swarm Optimization have been 
applied to obtain optimal feeding profiles in different fed-batch fermentation processes [22]. 
Maximization of production for a secreted coffee bean α-galactosidase in P. pastoris Mut+ 
phenotype was carried out considering a nonlinear function for qP=f(µ), where the dynamic 
optimization problem was solved analytically to provide some type of optimal µ time-trajectories 
from PMP by minimizing the Hamiltonian of the system [23]. Kobayashi et al. [19] implemented 
an optimized µ-profile from dynamic programming in P. pastoris PAOX1-based system to maximize 
the production of Human Serum Albumin resulting in a continuously exponential decrease of µ 
throughout the induction phase. An analogue profile was developed and implemented for a 
PGAP strain producing an antibody fragment (Fab) despite presenting completely opposite qP vs 
µ relationships, as mentioned [22]. An optimization tool based on calculus of variations was 
developed, as special case of PMP, which was evaluated with the use of the generalized 
reduced gradient (GRG) method. The platform built on 
Microsoft Excel® used Solver software to 
simply find a solution for optimal time profiles of µ in fed-batch cultures of P. pastoris making 
use of modelling data from product generation and substrate uptake kinetics.  
The objective of this work is in the way to satisfy the need of strategies for systematic 
bioprocess development in the cell factory P. pastoris under PAOX1 for the heterologous protein 
production. Thus, after the definition and analysis of optimized profiles (OP) by numerical 
methods from the use of a process model for systems with substrate inhibition patterns on both 
qP and µ, the experimental comparison with the most suitable alternatives previously reported 
has been carried out. As model protein, 1-3 positional selective recombinant Rhizopus oryzae 
lipase (ROL) [24] has been selected, because of its multiple applications in pharma [25], food 
[26,27] and energy industries [28,29].  
By accomplishing the stated, a simple optimization platform would be established, and 
transferable to other expression systems and/or to produce other target products.  \n\n 
 94 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
5.2  Materials and methods 
5.2.1 Strain 
The wild type P. pastoris X-33 strain containing the vector pPICZαROL was used for the 
heterologous expression of ROL under the control of the PAOX1 (Mut+ phenotype) [30]. 
5.2.2  Inoculum preparation 
Inoculum for bioreactor was cultured in 1 L baffled shake flasks at 30 °C, 150 rpm (HT Multitron 
incubator, Infors AG, Bottmingen, Switzerland), for 24 hours, in YPD medium (10 g of yeast 
extract, 20 g of peptone, 20 g of D-glucose and 500 µg of zeocin per liter of distilled water), 
initial pH 7.4. The already grown culture was centrifuged at 4500 x g and the cells were re-
suspended in bioreactor culture medium and used to inoculate a 5 L Sartorius Biostat B 
bioreactor (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany). Initial fermentation volume was 2 L and OD
600  close 
to 2.5. 
5.2.3 Fed-batch bioreactor cultivation 
Cells were inoculated in basal salts medium, which contained, per liter of distilled water: 
H3PO 4 (85%) 26.7 mL, CaSO4 0.93 g, K2SO 4 18.2 g, MgSO4·7H2O 14.9 g, KOH 4.13 g, glycerol 
40 g, 2 mL of biotin solution (20 mg L−1), 5 mL of trace salts solution and 0.5 mL of antifoam 
agent (A6426, Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, USA). Trace salts solution was composed, per 
liter of distilled water, of CuSO4·5H2O 6.0 g, NaI 0.08 g, MnSO4·H2O 3.0 g, Na2MoO 4·2H 2O 
0.2 g, H3BO 3 0.02 g, CoCl2 0.5 g, ZnCl2 20.0 g, FeSO 4·7H2O 65.0 g, biotin 0.3 g, H2SO 4 98 % 5 
ml.  
The fermentation was performed as described elsewhere [31], being divided into the phases of 
glycerol batch (GBP), transition (TP) and methanol induction (MIP). This last stage was optimized 
as stated before, carrying out a methanol non-limited fed-batch strategy (MNLFB), by finding the 
best methanol concentration time profile.  
During GBP, pH was controlled by adding NH
4OH 30 % (v/v) and DO was kept higher than 25% 
air saturation, by regulating the stirring rate between 600-1000 rpm, and introducing 1 vvm of 
air. TP consisted in a 5 h pre-programmed glycerol feeding rate under carbon limited conditions 
and methanol feeding rate stepwise increased, where cells adapt to methanol as a carbon \n\n 
 95 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
source [32]. Glycerol (50 % w/w with 5 mL of trace salts solution and 2 mL of biotin solution per 
liter) and pure methanol (with 5 mL of trace salts solution and 2 mL of biotin solution per liter) 
solutions were used as feeding. pH was controlled by the addition of KOH 5 M during both this 
phase and the next one. DO was, as well, kept at 25 % air saturation. 
Finally, during MIP,
 methanol was added as inducer and sole carbon source, and controlled 
according to each operational strategy. Methanol feed solution contained 5 mL of trace salts 
solution and 2 mL of biotin solution per liter of pure methanol. Nitrogen needs were fulfilled by 
the addition of NH
4Cl solution (200 g of NH4Cl, 5 mL of trace salts solution and 2 mL of biotin 
solution per liter). Its flow rate was directly linked to the methanol one and was automatically 
calculated online, by the previously estimated ammonium chloride/methanol requirements: 0.12 
g g
-1 to maintain the suitable NH4+ concentration [33,34]. 
DO was controlled at 25% in respect to air saturation (~ 2.3·10-4 mol O 2 L-1) by a cascade-based 
control, which involved regulating the stirring rate between 800 and 1000 rpm and total inlet 
gas flow rate of air and additional pure oxygen, being within the range 1-2 vvm. Temperature 
was kept at a value of 30 ºC and pH at 5.5, throughout the three phases of the process.  
5.2.4  Analytical methods and monitoring 
5.2.4.1 Methanol determination and control 
Methanol concentration was monitored by the Methanol Sensor System (Raven Biotech Inc., 
Vancouver, Canada) and controlled by performing a predictive-adaptive PI control strategy 
adapted from what is described elsewhere [7], that can be also derived from the general model 
control (GMC) theory, as the following equation describes: 
 ≈  − 
	
 − 	
	
 + ·
	
−	+1

  


  
Equation 5 .1 
where F is the substrate feeding rate [L h-1], Vt volume of culture broth [L], Sfeed methanol feeding 
concentration [g L-1], St residual methanol concentration [g L-1], KP gain of the controller [min-1], τI 
integral time constant of the controller [min], εt error or deviation from substrate set point [g L-1]. \n\n 
 96 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Apart from that, methanol concentration was also quantified offline by HPLC as previously 
reported [35]. Residual standard deviation (RSD) was estimated to be about 2 %. 
5.2.4.2  Dry cell weight analysis 
Biomass concentration was measured as the dry cell weight (DCW) per liter of culture, as 
described in chapter 2 and 3. Determinations were performed by triplicate and the relative 
standard deviation was about 5 %.  
5.2.4.3 Extracellular ROL activity assay 
ROL activity was measured by colorimetry, as it is described in previous sections. 
5.3 Theory/calculation 
5.3.1 The process model 
The fermentation process for ROL production by P. pastoris Mut+ phenotype is considered here. 
Yields, productivities and specific production rate in each methanol limited fed-batch (MLFB) 
condition were very low, obtaining the best results at the lowest specific growth rates. Similar 
results were obtained for methanol non-limited fed-batch (MNLFB) strategy at methanol set-
point concentrations up to 2 g L-1. However, for methanol set-points higher than 2 g L-1, a 
significant increase in the production was observed. At a methanol set-point of 3 g L-1, the 
highest product yield (Y*P/X), volumetric and specific productivity and mean specific production 
rate (qP,mean) were obtained, though in terms of ROL production high values were found in the 
whole range of 3-10 g L-1 [7]. Accordingly, a first-principles-based (mechanistic) model of the 
bioprocess was firstly developed to properly describe behavior of substrate, biomass and ROL 
production [12]. 
5.3.1.1 Mass balances and stoichiometric equations 
The calculations on this section were carried out as it is explained in chapter 4. 
5.3.1.2 Kinetic model for ROL production 
The model selected includes non-monotonic substrate functions (also called bell-shaped) for 
cell growth and ROL production, as shown below: \n\n 
 97 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
=  !", 	
$,+	+ 	%
,
 
Equation 5 .2  
where qi is the i-specific rate, qmax,i the nominal maximum value of the i-specific rate, KS,i  [g L-1] 
the substrate non-monotonic increasing model constant, KI,i [g L-1] the substrate inhibition non-
monotonic increasing model constant [12]. When working at different µ and no significant 
changes of metabolism are observed between conditions, yields associated to growth (intrinsic) 
and maintenance coefficients of each component can be found by the following expression: 
=&/( )+*/(  
Equation 5.3 
where Yi/X is the intrinsic yield between the i component (substrate, O2, CO2) and biomass, m i/X 
the maintenance coefficient for the i component. Hence, the bioprocess model was updated to 
include specific rates for oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production, as well as their 
contribution to variation of volume during the process. 
The dynamic model defined by mass balances can be used to test a set of possible operating 
strategies, e.g. by comparing different control strategies in a series of simulations solving the 
bioprocess model consisting of this set of ordinary differential equations (ODEs ) and algebraic 
equations. To solve dynamic equations, the Matlab’s ordinary differential equation solver 
function ode45  was used. 
Besides, to give simplicity to the whole optimization approach, and once confirmed that an error 
below 0.1% for the main state variables and performance indexes was obtained, Microsoft Excel® 
(2010) was used for the exploitation step of the model for bioprocess optimization. It allows the 
approximation of a model by numerically solving system equations and the optimization of an 
objective function by modifying the decision variables, while different constraints can be 
imposed [14]. In the current platform, to improve numerical solutions, new features were 
included, such as phase plots, non-monotonic functions and critical substrate concentrations 
for specific rates, net gas flow rate to estimate volume variation, determination of optimal 
S-\n\n 
 98 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
profiles, optional restrictions on oxygen transfer rate and, finally, maximization of the number of 
decision variables, as well as the use of central differences to compute derivatives.  
5.3.2 Global optimization approach 
From an industrial point of view, the usual purpose of model development is to improve process 
efficiency and to provide a quantitative basis for control. In this way, the mathematical model 
can be used to understand and evaluate the necessary trade-off among the different operating 
alternatives [36]. That is necessary to define target functions to be optimized, which can be used 
as design criteria and are discussed below. 
5.3.2.1 Design criteria and performance indexes  
As it has been mentioned before, Y*P/S, QP and PF are the most common performance indexes 
selected to assess bioprocess efficiency. Moreover, among others, specific productivities and 
yields on both biomass and substrate can also be considered. High values for these indexes 
result in the reduction of capital and operating costs. 
QP is defined as follows: 
+= ,(.)
·∆   
Equation 5 .4 
These criteria are firstly based on the calculation, estimation and/or quantification of the total 
amount of key product obtained (
PV) as follows: 
,(.)=   (1)
2
345
 
Equation 5 .5  
This quantification is normally carried out within the MIP, where methanol is used as the carbon 
and inducer substrate. The selected methanol feeding strategy used during the MIP is one of 
the most important factors to maximize heterologous protein production.  
5.3.2.2 Process optimization methodology 
Generally, to enhance bioprocess efficiency considering only upstream, a fermentation is 
expected to produce the maximum amount of product in the minimum process time (QP or space \n\n 
 99 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
time yield, STY), which requires to reach the maximum concentration of biomass (X) with a high 
specific production rate (qP) in the minimum process time as possible to harvest a product with 
the desired quality specifications [8]. The dynamic model can be used for systematic simulation-
based analysis of feasible feeding alternatives such constant flow rate, stepwise increased flow 
rate, exponential/open-loop µ control (MLFB), closed-loop S control (MNLFB) and customized 
feeding polices. 
Usually, the feeding profile is directly optimized as decision variable, whereas in other 
applications the goal of the optimization is to find the best values for µ such the volumetric 
productivity or STY is then maximized. This later kind of operation belongs to the class of 
physiological state control, which has important advantages that accounts for cell growth and 
physiology, substrate uptake, productivity and product quality. The relationship between 
product formation and biomass growth mainly governs the production process. This 
µ-profile 
can be implemented through different control procedures, involving from the simplest, 
consisting in an open-loop control structure based on mass balances by a µ-dependent 
exponential feeding [14,23], to a more complex closed-loop control, including the use of 
software sensors, predictive and adaptive control [37–39]. However, when 
µ and qP are a non-
monotonic function and their dependence on S does not coincide, the implementation of such 
optimized µ-profiles is hampered by the multiplicity of S-µ-q P states. Hence, another control 
variable different from µ and based on a rational approach is required. That is the case of ROL 
production under the control of PAOX1, where inhibition patterns by methanol are observed for 
specific rates of growth (µ) and ROL secretion (qP) [12]. These profiles are represented in Figure 
5.1. \n\n 
 100 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 5 .1 Kinetic model plots. S profiles of µ (___) and qP (---), including operational conditions for the 
simulated feeding strategies. The following profiles are depicted: CF (green line), CM (●), CS (x) , OP1 (♦) 
and OP2 (purple line). The subplot (down right) represents the quotient qP-µ along S. The (♦) point 
indicates its maximum.  
 
Since ROL production is clearly favored in conditions of methanol excess (MNLFB strategy), 
methanol concentration (S) is presented as the ideal and easy-to-implement state variable to be 
defined along the induction phase, which also prevents multiplicity of S-µ-q P states. 
Consequently, once S-profile was determined, F-profiles and µ-profiles were straightforwardly 
obtained from the combination of mass balances and growth kinetics. 
Numerical methods were considered to obtain a simple and versatile tool capable to be applied 
in a wide range of systems with different model structure and particular characteristics. 
Techniques regarding both deterministic and stochastic numerical methods were tested using 
Excel Solver® (2010). Concretely, they consisted on the Generalized reduced gradient (GRG) 
nonlinear solving method because of the actual non-complexity of the system under study, and 
the Evolutionary solving method that uses an 
Evolutionary algorithm (EA) as a subclass of 
Evolutionary Computation (EC), due to proven suitable performance/computing time ratio. 
\n\n 
 101 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
The interdependence of product formation and biomass growth is of key importance regardless 
of the selected criterion for the optimization, maximizing either yield or productivity [12]. 
Nevertheless, it must also be considered that the biomass growth in a bioprocess is limited, 
which may be due to biological and different physical restrictions, mainly heat and mass transfer. 
Although a maximum of biomass concentration needs to be set, mainly to reduce costs and 
facilitate downstream processes, often oxygen availability is the most important limitation for 
aerobic processes. For this reason, the volumetric mass transfer coefficient of oxygen (
kLa) is 
often used as scaling-up criterion. 
Accordingly, a maximum biomass concentration of Xmax = 55 g L-1 was imposed as restriction, 
due to operational limitations of mass and energy transfer.  A maximum working volume (Vmax) 
of 5 L and methanol concentration (Smax) of 10 g L-1 were considered to be within the actual 
operational range. Final time was a free variable to allow optimizing the selected performance 
indexes. Total substrate added was not imposed as constraint, since for this kind of process 
and with methanol as substrate, its contribution on total cost is not significant, if it is compared 
to other capital and operating costs. 
5.3.2.3 Implementation features of the optimized profiles  
The accomplishment of the optimal S-profiles obtained by the optimization algorithms for the 
different performance criteria applied were reached by the implementation of a reliable dynamic 
control into the system. The methanol closed-loop control employed is based on a previously 
developed predictive-PI feedback controller which has been intensively applied with success 
in MNLFB cultures [7] as well as in strategies involving mixed substrates [35]. In the present 
work, the feedback controller has incorporated adaptation of the controller parameters over the 
fermentation process, to take into account the dynamics of the system. The controller ensures 
that the residual methanol concentration (
S) in the culture broth is tracked with the minimum of 
error (MRE ≈ 2 %).  
This alternative, then, allows a simple implementation of an optimized µ profile with S as the 
controlled variable, thanks to the conjunction with the S-µ-q P model. That would minimize costs 
in an industrial application, and at the same time, avoid an open-loop control that would cause 
the process to be hampered by system perturbations [40].  \n\n 
 102 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
5.4  Results and discussion 
The challenging task of improving efficiency in the recombinant protein production (RPP) 
processes decomposes into several aspects necessary to fulfil. The basic features and 
characteristics outlined in the previous sections comprise system knowledge, data gathering, 
modelling of the system, exploitation of the model to explore promising alternatives, system 
optimization and finally verification and analysis of the feasible operating strategies. 
The first three aspects were successfully developed in previous works [7,12] and the subsequent 
ones corresponding to model exploitation for simulation and process optimization, as well as 
the concluding rational analysis of the different alternatives have been developed extensively 
in the present work. 
5.4.1 Process simulation for model exploitation 
Model exploitation was carried out to reduce experimental effort and quickly identify the most 
promising alternatives, which could then be verified and analyzed later by new experimental 
data. Initial conditions of fed-batch for the state variables were X(0) = 27 g L-1; P(0) = 50 U mL-1; 
V(0) = 2 L. S(0) was set to 1 g L-1 in process simulations where F profile was predefined, because 
it is the common residual concentration attained at the end of the TP, before the MIP started.  
Model parameters used for the performed simulations concerning the MIP are listed in Table 1. 
The ones corresponding to µ, qP and qS were adapted from firstly obtained [7,12] considering 
new experimental data [31]. The intrinsic yields and maintenance coefficients of qO2  and qCO2 , 
now included in the extended model, are also indicated [39]. 
 
 
 \n\n 
 103 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Table 5 .1 Summary of model parameters and errors. Relationship between specific rates (µ, qP) and the 
substrate (methanol) concentration, intrinsic yields and maintenance coefficients for qS, qO2  and qCO2 . CV 
% coefficient of variation. RMSE %, Normalized root mean squared error. 
 
 
Model parameters Model error 
 Parameter Units Value CV % RMSE %  
µ  
[h-1] 
µmax h-1 0.069 17.2  
KS,X g L-1 0.50 29.0 9.0 
KI,X g L-1 7.5 44.3 7.6* 
Scrit,X g L-1 1.9 -  
qP  
 [U g-1 h-1] 
qmax,P U g-1 h-1 2200 >100  
KS,P g L-1 10.0 >100 11  
KI,P g L-1 1.2 >100 8.0* 
Scrit,P g L-1 3.5 -  
qS  
[g g-1 h-1] 
qO2    
[molO2  g-1 h-1] 
YS/X g g-1 5.14 8.6 
5.7 m S/X g g-1 h-1 0.013 76.9 
YO2/X  molO2  g-1 0.206  9.7 
6.3 m O2/X  molO2  g-1 h-1 6.1·10 -4 75.4 
qCO2   
[molCO2  g-1 h-1] 
YCO2/X  molCO2  g-1 0.127 2.4 6.8 
m CO2/X  molCO2  g-1 h-1 4.0·10-4 75.0  
 
ROL fed-batch production in P. pastoris Mut+ phenotype under different feeding strategies - 
constant methanol flow rate (CF), exponential addition (CM, µ open-loop control or MLFB), linear-
increasing µ profile (LM), closed-loop methanol concentration control (CS, MNLFB) and 
optimized feeding profiles (OP1 and OP2) - were simulated and assessed for bioprocess 
efficiency. They are listed in Table 5.1.  
 
 \n\n 
 104 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Table 5 .2  L ist of simulated operational strategies for the methanol induction phase (MIP) and their design 
criteria. 
Nomenclatur
e 
Strategy Description 
CF Constant F F = 14 g h-1 
CM  
E
xponential addition 
Constant µ 
µ = 0.03 h-1. MLFB 
≈(1)6·)·exp():(−6))  
&(/:
∗ ·	

 
LM  Linear increasing µ From µ = 0.01 to 0.04 h-1. MLFB 
CS Constant S S = 2 g L-1. MNLFB 
OP1 Optimal S-profile 1 Maximum final titer (P). MNLFB 
OP2  O ptimal S-profile 2 
Maximum final volumetric productivity (QP). 
MNLFB 
 
5.4.1.1 Simulation of the standard feeding strategies 
Simulations CF, CM, LM and CS, which emulate operational strategies commonly implemented 
in heterologous protein production processes in P. pastoris [7,8,41], are to be discussed in this 
section.  
For that purpose, simulated time evolution of state variables (S, X, PV), manipulated variable (F) 
and specific rates (µ and qP) are shown in Figure 5.2 (F, S and µ) and Figure 5.3 (X, PV and qP) 
for the standard strategies and optimized feeding profiles (which will be discussed later on).  \n\n 
 105 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 5 .2  Simulation results. Substrate concentration (S), substrate feeding rate (F) and specific growth 
rate (µ) time profiles for different feeding strategies: CF (___ ___), CM (___ ·  ___), LM (---), CS (orange  ___), OP1 
(purple thick  ___), OP2 (blue thick ___). 
\n\n 
 106 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 5 .3 S imulated biomass (X), total amount of product (PV) and specific production rate (qP) for 
different standard feeding strategies and the optimal profiles: CF (___  ___), CM (___ · ___), LM (---), CS (orange 
thick ____), OP1 (purple thick ____), OP2 (blue thick ____). 
\n\n 
 107 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
The restriction of a fixed final X is clearly reflected in Figure 5.3, and it is essential for a proper 
comparison between strategies. CM and CS strategies let stable time profiles of specific rates 
(µ, qP) and substrate concentration (S). Both contribute to physiologic stability, process reliability 
and repeatability in front of the greatly decaying exponentially-like time evolution of specific 
rates and substrate concentration in CF. On the other hand, LM presents an additional 
drawback: methanol accumulates over the second half of the induction phase. This fact would 
make impossible to implement the open-loop control of 
µ (pre-programmed F profile) that is 
meant to be carried out as well in CM. 
Moreover, as discussed by Barrigón et al. 2015 [12], and hinted in simulated profiles in Figure 
5.3, MNLFB strategy (CS), located in the substrate inhibition areas which are above critical 
substrate concentration (Scrit,X), led to significantly higher values of both ROL titer and 
productivity. Hence, if a single substrate (methanol) for the induction phase is considered, 
optimization procedure like fine-tuning or improvement of the MNLFB strategy would lead to 
the best results in terms of bioprocess efficiency dictated by total titer and productivity. This 
strategy, though, is more complex and higher energy and substrate demanding [31].  
5.4.1.2 Optimized feeding profiles by simulation 
Simulation results corresponding to the optimized profiles obtained for different design criteria 
based on performance indexes PF (OP1) and QP (OP2) are presented in Table 5.3. 
Considering, first, variations of Y*X/S not to be significant within the operation range for µ and qS; 
second, the final volume among the runs to be similar and, finally, the same initial conditions for 
the induction phase, a similar total added substrate can also be expected. Thus, optimization 
results for the specific productivity (U g-1 h-1), total productivity (U h-1), total product (PV) and 
product yield (Y*P/S) as design criteria are expected to be very similar to the ones obtained with 
QP and PF. Moreover, neither QP nor PF optimization results show major improvement between 
each other’s performance indexes.  
 \n\n 
 108 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Table 5 .3 Optimization performance indexes. Simulation results for the different design criteria and 
optimization algorithms applied: GRG and EA. ± indicates 95 % confidence intervals. Productivities and 
yields were calculated over all fermentation time. 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance 
index  
 
Design criteria 
 
 
Final titer (OP1) 
PF [U mL -1] 
Volumetric  
productivity (OP2) 
QP [U L-1 h-1] 
 
 
GRG  
 
EA GRG  EA 
Final titer 
PF [U mL -1] 305 303 ± 1 
 
300 
 
298 ± 1 
Volumetric  
productivity  
QP [ U L-1 h-1] 
6
250 6225 ± 47 6421 6403 ± 4 
Yield of 
product  
on biomass  
Y*P/X [U g-1] 
5539 5511 ± 14 5446 5425 ± 9 
Specific 
 productivity 
[U g-1 h-1] 
1
14 116 ± 1 117 118 ± 1 
Incremental 
total product 
∆PV [U] 
6.74· 105 (6.68 ± 0.05) · 105 6.60 · 10 5 (6.56 ± 0.01) · 105 
 
GRG and EA were used as alternative optimization methods to state whether significant 
differences appear. GRG did not show differences between different simulations when distinct 
initial values and main parameters were applied. Besides, EA, as stochastic metaheuristic 
algorithm and belonging to the class of EC, was set to run for several times (N = 30) to check 
the stability and reproducibility of the solution it provided. The 95 % confidence intervals for the 
performance indexes are included, as well, in Table 5.3. It can be stated that mostly no 
significant differences were observed between the overall performances of the two algorithms 
when compared. \n\n 
 109 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Furthermore, observing S profiles from Figure 5.2, OP1 and OP2 present remarkable differences 
from each other. To achieve the highest PF, the optimizer found, as final solution, a constant S 
operation at maximum Y*P/X (indicated in Figure 1), whereas maximizing QP required an 
increasing S-profile within maximum qP and Y*P/X, (corresponding to a constant and decreasing 
µ profile, respectively). Both are located in the MNLFB spectrum (S > Scrit,X), as expected, though 
not exactly at the maximum point of qP, but in higher S ranges (Figure 5.1). This fact can be 
attributed to, first, the non-coincidence, (and, at the same time, proximity) between the maxima 
of µ and qP in respect to S. Second, and related to the previous reason, the substrate inhibition 
pattern that both µ and qP describe makes the compromise of high qP at moderate growth 
possible, so that higher levels of product can be obtained before reaching the top operational 
limit of 
X. This is especially relevant when optimizing PF, since shorter process time can be given 
up in favor of higher product concentrations. This statement is reinforced by the fact that S 
values of OP2 are lower than OP1’s, because there, both PF and process time have to be 
balanced to obtain the highest QP.  
Moreover, as expected, OP1 and OP2 are the foremost in terms of PV (Figure 5.3), when 
compared to the standard strategies, despite being much closer to CS. The time to achieve 
those levels of PV is also significantly shorter, boosting QP, in consequence.  
Finally, to sum up, from these simulations, it can be stated that OP1, compared to the most used 
MLFB strategy of constant µ (CM) achieves a 2.2-fold higher titer, whilst OP2 outcomes it with a 
2.4-fold higher volumetric productivity. 
5.4.2  Experimental results with optimized profiles. Comparison among alternative 
feeding strategies 
In the first place, Figure 5.4A and Figure 5.4B show time evolution of incremental total activity 
(∆PV), logarithmic total biomass ratio (ln(XV/(X0V0))), and total substrate in the bioreactor (SV) 
for both OP1 and OP2 experimental results and simulations. Optimized simulation profiles have 
been extended to the actual final experimental time.  \n\n 
 110 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 5 .4 Experimental (symbols) and simulated (solid lines) optimal time profiles. (A) OP1. (B) OP2. 
Incremental total activity (∆PV) (●), logarithmic total biomass ratio (ln(XV/(X0V0))) (x) , total substrate (SV) 
(···) . 
It can be stated that, saving slight differences, experimental data showed a good 
agreement with simulated results for ∆PV, obtaining a final relative error lower than 5 % 
for both OP1 and OP2. Only minor differences are observed between simulated and 
experimental values for biomass and substrate, caused by slight inaccuracies in process 
modelling, monitoring and control.  
\n\n 
 111 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Apart from that, a comparison with the most suitable alternatives previously reported 
with P. pastoris expressing ROL under the control of PAOX1 has been also carried out, 
and their data is presented in both Table 5.4 and Figure 5.5. 
Table 5.4 gathers the final performance indexes and mean specific rates obtained for 
each case. As it is clearly reflected, a general positive progression is observed, from 
less to more complex strategies (left to right in Table 5.4), in terms of the key operating 
conditions. 
More specifically, a trade-off between 
qP and µ can be carried out to maximize a given 
performance index. Two different kinds of operational strategy, methanol limited (MLFB) 
and methanol non-limited fed-batch (MNLFB) cultures (this latter with different levels of 
control) have been intensively analyzed previously [7,42]. As mentioned, these most 
commonly applied control strategies allow maintaining rather constant the key specific 
rates for cell growth (
µ) and substrate uptake (qS) through the quasi-steady state 
hypothesis for the substrate while seeking to maximize target protein production. As 
can be seen in Table 5.4, yields, productivities and specific production rate in MLFB 
(constant 
µ of 0.015 h-1) were the lowest ones in those terms. Following this last one, the 
great fluctuations the S-profile underwent in MNLFB non-automatic control strategy 
made those conditions to produce results that resembled much more to MLFB ones. 
Besides, in previous non-optimized MNLFB operations [7] the values of these 
parameters were significantly exceeded. The maximum product yield (
Y*P/X) and PF at a 
methanol set-point of 10 g L-1 was obtained, although volumetric and specific 
productivity and mean specific production rate (qP,mean) were higher at 3 g L-1.  
 
 \n\n 
 112 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish 
Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Table 5 .4 Bioprocess efficiency comparison. Substrate feeding strategies with 
P. pastoris expressing ROL under control of P
AOX1. ± indicates standard 
deviation (SD). Productivities and yields are calculated over all fermentation time. 
 
  
Non -
automatic 
MNLFB  
[
30] 
MLFB  
[
7] 
MNLFB1 
[
7] 
MNLFB2  
[
7]  
MNLFB  
Max.Titer 
 
OP1 
 
MNLFB  
Max.Vol. 
Productivity 
OP2  
 
Key 
operating 
condition 
Units 
Non -
automatic 
control 
S < 5 g L-1 
µ = 0.015 h-1 S = 3.0 g L-1 S = 10 g L-1 
S and
 µ 
constant 
S and 
µ 
time profile 
ROL titer [ U mL -1] 150 135 280 294 303 302 
Y
*P/X
 [U g-1] 2470 2644 5282 5635 5509 5395 
Volumetric 
Productivity [U L-1 h-1] 3000 1857 5406 4264 5777 6224 
Specific 
Productivity [U g-1 h-1] 49 36 102 82 105 111 
µ
mean
 [h-1] 0.036 0.014±0.001 0.046±0.002 0.025±0.001 0.037±0.001 0.040±0.006 
q
S,mean
 [g g-1 h-1] 0.14 0.07±0.01 0.20±0.01 0.14±0.01 0.19±0.01 0.17±0.01 
q
P,mean
 [U g-1 h-1] 130 46±4 322±13 175±6 276±12 307±7 \n\n 
 113 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
 
Figure 5 .5  E xperimental ROL activity (P) time profiles. OP1 (■), OP2 (●) and alternative strategies: non-
automatic MNLFB (▼), MLFB (x) , MNLFB1 (♦), MNLFB2 (▲). 
Finally, fine-tuning of the MNLFB operation by the implementation of substrate optimal profiles 
make OP1 and OP2 stand out among the rest. On one hand, OP1 surpassed, as expected, 10 g 
L-1 MNLFB strategy in terms of ROL final activity, though the restriction of final biomass limits this 
parameter not to be considerably higher, even though Y*P/X has been boosted more than a 20 
% (10 % for specific productivity) from the mentioned strategy. This top level of PF is reached, 
but, with a 25 % higher volumetric productivity than from a substrate concentration of 10 g L-1 
and slightly lower one than from the 3 g L-1 case. On the other hand, the performance of OP2 
fulfilled the expectations achieving the highest QP, concretely surpassing the previous best 
strategy in those terms (3 g L-1 MNLFB) with more than a 15 %. As expected, and hinted in the 
kinetic model (Figure 1), Y*P/X was lower in the S spectrum where OP2 induction phase is located. 
Accordingly, specific productivity was also superior. µ also experimented higher changes during 
this operation (see SD in µmean), as expected in a case where the S-profile did not consist on a 
constant value. qP is higher than OP1, but lower than 3 g L-1 MNLFB case, as well as the model 
predicted. 
\n\n 
 114 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Additionally, Table 5.5 gathers the needs and complexity of monitoring and control of each 
operational strategy that has been just discussed. With it, the following observations can be 
appointed. 
First, non-automatic MNLFB case required both little knowledge of the cell physiology and no 
online monitoring. However, it resulted too time consuming and results were clearly outcome 
by the following MNLFB alternatives.  
Second, MLFB strategy let the variable µ to be indirectly controlled with no real-time information 
from the process and so, low labor needs. Still, as it is only implementable within the limited 
range of S, improvement of bioprocess efficiency is not achievable in the present system and 
in addition, Y*X/S needs to be previously determined for an appropriate µ control.   
Moreover, by increasing online monitoring complexity, a fine S-control was achieved in MNLFB 
and boosted the values of the main performance indexes of industrial interest. This case also 
required little higher labor, but still negligible if it is compared to the non-automatic control case. 
Finally, optimizations of QP and PF were successfully fulfilled with no more operational 
complexity requirements in respect to the MNLFB strategies. Further knowledge of the 
physiology of the strain used, though, was needed. A simple macrokinetic model was employed 
for simulation, obtaining results, as seen, that fit adequately into the predictions. A simple 
predictive control plus an adaptive PI feedback control was applied in this case and no further 
advanced control structure had to be considered.   
Furthermore, most of the facts previously stated are clearly reflected in Figure 5.5. Time 
evolution of 
P provides a plain idea of how the performance of the different strategies had run 
in terms of PF and QP (from the slopes of the profiles). A whole range of improvement is perfectly 
appreciated, from the worst case scenario, which was working in the limited spectrum of S, 
below Scrit,x (MLFB), to the MNLFB strategies, with a high heterogeneity of results between the 
least complex one (non-automatic control of S), constant S = 10 g L-1 and the rest. Finally, and 
most remarkably, OP1 and OP2 performances have overcome 3 g L-1 MNLFB strategy in PF and 
in QP, respectively, which corresponds to one of the main objectives of the whole approach 
presented in this work. \n\n 
 115 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish 
Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Table 5 .5  Summary of the main control and monitoring features. Operational strategies of ROL production in 
P. pastoris under methanol carbon source, 
published and from the present study. 
Operational 
strategy 
Non -automatic 
MNLFB [38] MLFB [ 17] MNLFB1 [ 17] MNLFB2 [ 17] OP1 OP2  
 
Model -based 
 
 S  
 
S – X 
 
 S  
 S  
 
	−1−. 
:− )−  
 
 
	−1−. 
:− )−  
 
Goal 
S<5 g L-1 Constant 
µ Constant 
S 
3 g L-1 
Constant 
S 
10 g L-1 Max 
P
F Max 
Q
P 
Control 
structure 
Non-automatic 
P
redictive Feed forward 
Predictive 
+ 
Feedback PI 
Predictive 
+ 
Feedback PI 
Predictive 
+ 
Feedback adaptive 
PI 
Predictive 
+ 
Feedback adaptive PI 
Controlled 
variable 
(in bold) 
 
<<	 !" 
)≠? 
@=):<)AB 
Limited 	 
<=	:>	AB
 
)≈?
 
<=	:>	AB
 
)≈? 
< profile 
	:=? 
< profile 
Tracking 	:  
Feeding 
strategy 
(manipulated 
variable) 
 
≈− 
(	
−	)
	
 ≈
(1)6·) :·exp():(− 6))  
&(/:
∗ ·	

 ≈− 
	
−	
	
 ≈− 
	
−	
	
 ≈− 
	
−	
	
 ≈− 
	
−	
	
 
 
 
 
 
 +  +1

  


 +  +1

  


 +  ·
(	
−	)+1

 


 +  ·
(	
−	)+1

  


 
Requirements 
of monitoring 
 
S offline 
Estimated  
volume 
 
-  
S online 
Estimated 
volume 
 
S online 
Estimated 
volume 
 
S online 
Estimated  
volume 
 
S online 
Estimated  
volume 
 
Needed 
inputs 
 
	
      6 
 
):  &(/:
∗  
(1)6  	
 
6 
 
	: 6  	
 
   
 
	: 6  	
 
   
 
	: 6  	
 
   
 
	: 6  	
 
   
 \n\n 
 116 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
5.5  Conclusions 
Bioprocess optimization of the P. pastoris system expressing ROL under PAOX1 control has been 
carried out, as a significant progress in the improvement of the main key performance indexes 
of interest has arisen. The study presents itself as the culmination of a process that began with 
the identification of a product with industrial interest and its expression in P. pastoris, the 
implementation of simple fed-batch operational strategies, which were followed by the design 
of new alternatives which required more instrumentation and control complexity that were able 
to boost the bioprocess efficiency, and that led to the complete characterization of the process 
kinetics and its modelling.   
From that point, the optimization and simulation of optimal 
S-µ-F profiles and their further 
experimental implementation in the current system made it possible to reach the top levels of 
the main parameters for industrial interest. Concretely, a 2.2-fold higher PF and 3.4-fold higher 
QP, compared to the best previously implemented MLFB strategy (open-loop µ control), and 1.15-
fold higher and 1.08-fold higher than 3 g L-1 MNLFB strategy, respectively, was obtained; and so 
1.45-fold higher QP and 1.03-fold higher PF than 10 g L-1 MNLFB. All of that was possible, most 
importantly, without increasing significantly neither process complexity nor operational and 
labor costs.  
The whole approach, aiming to cover the requirements of strategies for systematic bioprocess 
development from a bioprocess engineering point of view, has been shown as valid to improve 
efficiency in recombinant protein production processes. The basic features comprise system 
knowledge, data gathering, modelling of the system, exploitation of the model to investigate 
promising alternatives, system optimization and finally verification and analysis of the feasible 
operating strategies. The advantages of the procedure are its simplicity, flexibility and 
transferability, since user-friendly software is applied, allowing every scientist and engineer to 
impose further biological and technological constraints to different design criteria, for example, 
total or specific yields and productivities. This model-based 
roadmap can also be used as a 
platform to design new alternative operating modes, and even to produce other proteins of 
interest, for cell factories with substrate inhibition patterns on both qP and µ, which, like the \n\n 
 117 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
present case, cause multiplicity states for S-µ-q P that make the process optimization and 
operation more complex and challenging.  \n\n 
 118 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
5.6  References  
[1] K. Sreekrishna, Pichia, Optimization of Protein Expression, Encycl. Ind. Biotechnol. 190 
(2010) 695–701. 
[2] G. Potvin, A. Ahmad, Z. Zhang, Bioprocess engineering aspects of heterologous protein 
production in Pichia pastoris: A review, Biochem. Eng. J. 64 (2012) 91–105. 
[3] M. Jahic, F. Wallberg, M. Bollok, P. Garcia, S. Enfors, Temperature limited fed-batch 
technique for control of proteolysis in Pichia pastoris bioreactor cultures, Microb. Cell 
Fact. 2:6 (2003). 
[4] A. Surribas, R. Stahn, J.L. Montesinos, S.O. Enfors, F. Valero, M. Jahic, Production of a 
Rhizopus oryzae lipase from Pichia pastoris using alternative operational strategies, J. 
Biotechnol. 130 (2007) 291–299. 
[5] M. Berdichevsky, M. D’Anjou, M.R. Mallem, S.S. Shaikh, T.I. Potgieter, Improved 
production of monoclonal antibodies through oxygen-limited cultivation of 
glycoengineered yeast, J. Biotechnol. 155 (2011) 217–224. 
[6] T. Egli, Microbial growth and physiology: A call for better craftsmanship, Front. Microbiol. 
6 (2015) 1–12. 
[7] J.M. Barrigón, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, Searching the best operational strategies for 
Rhizopus oryzae lipase production in Pichia pastoris Mut+ phenotype: Methanol limited 
or methanol non-limited fed-batch cultures?, Biochem. Eng. J. 75 (2013) 47–54. 
[8] V. Looser, B. Bruhlmann, F. Bumbak, C. Stenger, M. Costa, A. Camattari, D. Fotiadis, K. 
Kovar, Cultivation strategies to enhance productivity of Pichia pastoris: A review, 
Biotechnol. Adv. 33 (2015) 1177–1193. 
[9] O. Cos, R. Ramón, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, Operational strategies, monitoring and 
control of heterologous protein production in the methylotrophic yeast Pichia pastoris 
under different promoters: a review, Microb. Cell Fact. 5:17 (2006). 
[10] T.I. Potgieter, S.D. Kersey, M.R. Mallem, A.C. Nylen, M. D’Anjou, Antibody expression \n\n 
 119 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
kinetics in glycoengineered Pichia pastoris, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 106 (2010) 918–927. 
[11] M.C.M. Hensing, R.J. Rouwenhorst, J.J. Heijnen, J.P. van Dijken, J.T. Pronk, Physiological 
and technological aspects of large-scale heterologous-protein production with yeasts, 
Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 67 (1995) 261–279. 
[12] J.M. Barrigon, F. Valero, J.L. Montesinos, A macrokinetic model-based comparative meta-
analysis of recombinant protein production by Pichia pastoris under AOX1 promoter, 
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 112 (2015) 1132–1145. 
[13] X. Garcia-Ortega, P. Ferrer, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, Fed-batch operational strategies 
for recombinant Fab production with Pichia pastoris using the constitutive GAP promoter, 
Biochem. Eng. J. 79 (2013) 172–181. 
[14] M. Maurer, M. Kühleitner, B. Gasser, D. Mattanovich, Versatile modeling and optimization 
of fed batch processes for the production of secreted heterologous proteins with Pichia 
pastoris, Microb. Cell Fact. 5:37 (2006). 
[15] J.M. Modak, H.C. Lim, Y.J. Tayeb, General characteristics of optimal feed rate profiles for 
various fed-batch fermentation processes, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 28 (1986) 1396–1407. 
[16] S. Park, W.F. Ramirez, Optimal Production of Secreted Protein in Fed-Batch Reactors, 
AIChe J. 34 (1988) 1550–1558. 
[17] I.Y. Smets, J.E. Claes, E.J. November, G.P. Bastin, J.F. Van Impe, Optimal adaptive control 
of (bio)chemical reactors: Past, present and future, J. Process Control. 14 (2004) 795–
805. 
[18] H. Ohno, E. Nakanishi, T. Takamatsu, Optimal control of a semibatch fermentation, 
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 18 (1976) 847–864. 
[19] K. Kobayashi, S. Kuwae, T. Ohya, T. Ohda, M. Ohyama, K. Tomomitsu, High level secretion 
of recombinant human serum albumin by fed-batch fermentation of the methylotrophic 
yeast, 
Pichia pastoris, based on optimal methanol feeding strategy, J. Biosci. Bioeng. 90 
(2000) 280–288. \n\n 
 120 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
[20] S. Ochoa, A new approach for finding smooth optimal feeding profiles in fed-batch 
fermentations, Biochem. Eng. J. 105 (2016) 177–188. 
[21] P.M. Bapat, N.U. Padiyar, N.N. Dave, S. Bhartiya, P.P. Wangikar, S. Dash, Model-Based 
Optimization of Feeding Recipe for Rifamycin Fermentation, AIChe J. 52 (2006) 4249–
4257. 
[22] M. Rocha, R. Mendes, O. Rocha, I. Rocha, E.C. Ferreira, Optimization of fed-batch 
fermentation processes with bio-inspired algorithms, Expert Syst. Appl. 41 (2014) 2186–
2195. 
[23] W. Zhang, J. Sinha, L. a Smith, M. Inan, M.M. Meagher, Maximization of production of 
secreted recombinant proteins in Pichia pastoris fed-batch fermentation, Biotechnol. 
Prog. 21 (2005) 386–393. 
[24] M. Guillén, M.D. Benaiges, F. Valero, Immobilization and stability of a Rhizopus oryzae 
lipase expressed in Pichia pastoris: Comparison between native and recombinant 
variants, Biotechnol. Prog. 27 (2011) 1232–1241. 
[25] P.G. Quintana, M. Guillén, M. Marciello, F. Valero, J.M. Palomo, A. Baldessari, Immobilized 
heterologous Rhizopus oryzae lipase as an efficient catalyst in the acetylation of 
cortexolone, European J. Org. Chem. (2012) 4306–4312. 
[26] P.A. Nunes, P. Pires-Cabral, M. Guillén, F. Valero, D. Luna, S. Ferreira-Dias, Production of 
MLM-type structured lipids catalyzed by immobilized heterologous Rhizopus oryzae 
lipase, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 88 (2011) 473–480. 
[27] C. Tecelão, M. Guillén, F. Valero, S. Ferreira-Dias, Immobilized heterologous Rhizopus 
oryzae lipase: A feasible biocatalyst for the production of human milk fat substitutes, 
Biochem. Eng. J. 67 (2012) 104–110.  
[28] A. Canet, M.D. Benaiges, F. Valero, Biodiesel synthesis in a solvent-free system by 
recombinant Rhizopus oryzae lipase. Study of the catalytic reaction progress, J. Am. Oil 
Chem. Soc. 91 (2014) 1499–1506. \n\n 
 121 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
[29] K. Bonet-Ragel, A. Canet, M.D. Benaiges, F. Valero, Synthesis of biodiesel from high FFA 
alperujo oil catalysed by immobilised lipase, Fuel. 161 (2015) 12–17. 
[30] O. Cos, A. Serrano, J.L. Montesinos, P. Ferrer, J.M. Cregg, F. Valero, Combined effect of 
the methanol utilization (Mut) phenotype and gene dosage on recombinant protein 
production in Pichia pastoris fed-batch cultures., J. Biotechnol. 116 (2005) 321–335. 
[31] X. Ponte, J.L. Montesinos-Seguí, F. Valero, Bioprocess efficiency in Rhizopus oryzae 
lipase production by Pichia pastoris under the control of PAOX1 is oxygen tension 
dependent, Process Biochem. 51 (2016) 1954–1963. 
[32] S. Minning, A. Serrano, P. Ferrer, C. Solà, R.D. Schmid, F. Valero, Optimization of the high-
level production of Rhizopus oryzae lipase in Pichia pastoris, J. Biotechnol. 86 (2001) 59–
70. 
[33] D.B. Choi, E.Y. Park, Enhanced production of mouse a-amylase by feeding combined 
nitrogen and carbon sources in fed-batch culture of recombinant Pichia pastoris, Process 
Biochem. 41 (2006) 390–397. 
[34] X.W. Yu, X. Lu, L.S. Zhao, Y. Xu, Impact of NH4+ nitrogen source on the production of 
Rhizopus oryzae lipase in Pichia pastoris, Process Biochem. 48 (2013) 1462–1468. 
[35] C. Arnau, C. Casas, F. Valero, The effect of glycerol mixed substrate on the heterologous 
production of a Rhizopus oryzae lipase in Pichia pastoris system, Biochem. Eng. J. 57 
(2011) 30–37. 
[36] L.R. Formenti, A. Nørregaard, A. Bolic, D.Q. Hernandez, T. Hagemann, A.L. Heins, H. 
Larsson, L. Mears, M. Mauricio-Iglesias, U. Krühne, K. V. Gernaey, Challenges in industrial 
fermentation technology research, Biotechnol. J. 9 (2014) 727–738. 
[37] Z.I.T.A. Soons, J.A. Voogt, G. van Straten, A.J.B. van Boxtel, Constant specific growth rate 
in fed-batch cultivation of Bordetella pertussis using adaptive control, J. Biotechnol. 125 
(2006) 252–268. 
[38] A.C.A. Veloso, I. Rocha, E.C. Ferreira, Monitoring of fed-batch 
E. coli fermentations with \n\n 
 122 
 
5. Optimal feeding profiles Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
software sensors, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 32 (2009) 381–388. 
[39] M. Dabros, M.M. Schuler, I.W. Marison, Simple control of specific growth rate in 
biotechnological fed-batch processes based on enhanced online measurements of 
biomass, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 33 (2010) 1109–1118. 
[40] L. Mears, S.M. Stocks, G. Sin, K. V. Gernaey, A review of control strategies for 
manipulating the feed rate in fed-batch fermentation processes, J. Biotechnol. 245 (2017) 
34–46. 
[41] O. Spadiut, D. Zalai, C. Dietzsch, C. Herwig, Quantitative comparison of dynamic 
physiological feeding profiles for recombinant protein production with 
Pichia pastoris., 
Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 37 (2014) 1163–1172. 
[42] O. Cos, D. Resina, P. Ferrer, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, Heterologous production of 
Rhizopus oryzae lipase in Pichia pastoris using the alcohol oxidase and formaldehyde 
dehydrogenase promoters in batch and fed-batch cultures, Biochem. Eng. J. 26 (2005) 
86–94. 
 \n\n 
 
 
123 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
6 THE MICROBIOREACTOR AS A TOOL TO EVALUATE FED-
BATCH STRATEGIES AND HIGH-THROUGHPUT CLONE 
SCREENING  
This chapter has been published as a research paper at the journal Microbial Cell Factories: 
J. Hemmerich, N. Adelantado, J. Barrigón, X. Ponte, A. Hörmann, P. Ferrer, F. Kensy, F. Valero, Comprehensive clone 
screening and evaluation of fed-batch strategies in a microbioreactor and lab scale stirred tank bioreactor system: 
application on 
Pichia pastoris producing Rhizopus oryzae lipase, Microb. Cell Fact. 13 (2014) 36 
6.1 Introduction 
In the overall P. pastoris bioprocess based on PAOX1 , one of the most important bottlenecks is 
the clone selection, because the reproducibility of the cultures in shake flasks is rather low and 
time consuming when the number of potential clones to screen is high [1]. The use of microtiter 
plates can increase the throughput of clone screening procedures, but reproducibility and 
scalability when using methanol is limited. Low reproducibility is mainly caused by “edge 
effects” [2], which stands for uneven evaporation distribution throughout a microplate; 
especially that evaporation is higher in the outer wells of a microplate. This is observed when 
placing microplates on standard floor shakers without controlled atmosphere, e.g. for relative 
humidity. With the use of volatile substrates like methanol, this effect is even more pronounced. 
Furthermore, the optimization of operational fed-batch strategies at high cell densities can be 
expensive and time consuming. Although mathematical modelling can reduce the number of 
experiments, the application of new approaches to solve these drawbacks is necessary. In this 
context, the use of microbioreactors is an excellent alternative to minimize these pitfalls. 
Microbioreactors (MBR) are, essentially, miniaturized versions of well-established bioreactor 
systems like stirred tank reactors (STR). Due to the micro-scale of these MBR, an exact scale-
down of technical equipment needed for the operation of STR is not possible in all cases. For 
example, tubing and pumps are commonly used to feed nutrients or adjust pH into the STR 
during fed-batch cultivations. To translate a fed-batch process into a MBR is not a practical 
solution, because pumps for it are not commercially available or practical for handle the \n\n 
 
 
124 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
necessarily small volumes of several micro- or nanoliters. Regarding MBR, other mechanisms 
have to be applied, like the integration of pipetting robots or microfluidic structures for liquid 
delivery to the broth [3–5]. 
 
Furthermore, mixing and aeration of fermentation broth is usually achieved using mechanically 
agitated stirrers in STR with well-known and described impact on fluid dynamics. In MBR, this is 
achieved by shaken microplates. Aeration in cultivation of oxygen-demanding cell types like 
E. coli or yeast (S. cerevisiae, P. pastoris) is a critical parameter. In STR, oxygen transfer rate 
(OTR) is improved by increasing stirring and aeration rate, diminishing air bubble size and using 
pure oxygen or air enriched with oxygen instead of air. Similar strategies can be used partly for 
MBR, where an increase of the OTR in shaken microtiter plates has been achieved by means of 
new geometric design of the wells [6], or submerged injection of air/oxygen [7]. 
Until now, only a few applications of MBR using 
P. pastoris in bioprocess development can be 
found in literature, although several laboratories have been using microtiter plates for clone 
screening purposes [8.9]. 
One MBR system was described for cultivation of P. pastoris [7]. For the feeding strategy used 
in that example, the cultivation cassette had to be removed from the machine and placed under 
a laminar flow cabinet to add several substrate shots manually. In contrast, the RoboLector 
platform is able to perform fed-batch operational strategies, which are closer to commonly 
applied conditions in STR. Because of the integration of an automated liquid handling system 
in the RoboLector MBR, there was no need to remove the cultivation cassette (i.e. FlowerPlate) 
from the incubation machine (i.e. BioLector). Therefore, it was possible to add nutrients much 
more frequently without interruption of shaking and thus, without interruption of oxygen 
transfer. This high frequency of nutrient addition was a key parameter in mimicking a typical 
STR fermentation with 
P. pastoris. Additionally, the MBR strategy of enzymatic glucose release 
with daily addition of methanol could be applied in the BioLector alone without the integrated 
liquid handling system, and also in other MBR. \n\n 
 
 
125 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Comparable to the approach of feeding nutrients at a high frequency, there is an example found 
in literature [10], where six parallel operated bubble columns with a working volume of several 
hundred milliliters were used. Due to the volume, this system should not be considered as a 
microbioreactor, but as a minibioreactor system. These bubble columns can be equipped with 
pO
2- and pH-electrodes, while a pump is giving shots of 1 mL of methanol to the fermentation 
broth. Similar to the MBR RoboLector approach described here, the authors report the 
usefulness of a scale-down approach to develop suitable process parameters, which are to be 
transferred into classical STR. It should be mentioned that this system required more resources 
for set up because of necessary cleaning and sterilization procedures, wiring and calibration of 
the electrodes and tubing set up for the pumping system. 
Another kind of minibioreactor uses up to eight specialized shake flasks as culture vessels in 
parallel [11,12]. These flasks are equipped with caps having gas and pressure sensors, whereas 
the lower part is geometrically equal to standard shake flasks. The sensors determine 
respiration activities of the cultures, namely oxygen uptake rate (OUR), carbon dioxide evolution 
rate (CER) and respiratory quotient (RQ). The authors recommend to culture replicates in 
standard shake flasks under same conditions, which serve for sampling and subsequent 
analytics. Also, there is technical equipment for sampling and feeding of the individual 
measuring flasks available (HiTec Zang, Herzogenrath, Germany). 
Data monitoring and manipulation of MBR cultivations are essential to generate results, which 
are of high process relevance, especially when it comes to translating results into pilot and 
production scale. This is a fundamental requirement for on-going studies in those scales. Finally, 
the ultimate aim of MBR studies in biotechnological developments is to shift as many steps as 
possible into the microliter scale. Therefore, suitable MBR systems have to operate in a reliable 
and robust way with user friendly handling to facilitate the high throughput needs. 
With current techniques in molecular biology, huge clone pools are easily generated, resulting 
from the combinatory use of different genetic libraries for e.g. promoters [13,14], protein variants 
[15] or secretion signals [16]. In combination with different cultivation setups to be evaluated (e.g. 
feeding strategy, medium background, induction strength and optimal time point of induction), 
the resulting number of experiments grows very fast with each factor to be investigated [17]. In \n\n 
 
 
126 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
this context, with the use of MBR it becomes possible to investigate comprehensive studies on 
clone screening and process optimization jointly due to the ability to perform several cultivations 
in parallel. Additionally, the use of software tools like Design-of-Experiments (DoE) and genetic 
algorithms will boost performance, as the number of experiments to be conducted can be 
reduced in a meaningful way. 
The aim of this study is to demonstrate that the RoboLector automated microbioreactor platform 
is a suitable tool to minimize the clone selection step and to optimize fed-batch mixed 
substrates (methanol and other carbon source) operational strategies for the P
AOX1 -based 
P. pastoris system, using a set of Mut+ phenotype strains producing a heterologous Rhizopus 
oryzae lipase (ROL) as a case example. The RoboLector MBR system is the integration of the 
BioLector MBR system [18] into a liquid handling robot. RoboLector was used as it matches some 
important requirements for bioprocess development [3,19] 
6.2  Results and discussion 
6.2.1 Clone selection 
The clones used for the present work had been previously obtained prior to it. Two different 
series of X-33-derived strains expressing a lipase from R. oryzae (ROL) under the PAOX1 promoter 
had been constructed. In the first series, a pre-existing X-33 strain expressing ROL [20] had 
been transformed with an expression vector containing the induced form of the P. pastoris’ 
HAC1 transcriptional factor under the control of PAOX1  (Clones 1–6). The second strain series was 
obtained by replica plating of X-33/pPICZαA_ROL transformants on agar plates containing 
increasing concentrations of zeocin, aiming at the selection of transformants with multiple 
copies of the 
ROL expression cassette (Clones 7–12). From each series of strains, six 
transformants were selected for further studies at MBR scale. 
For reference and comparison purposes, expression experiments were initially performed in 
shake flasks, following a two-step procedure for Mut+ strains similar to the standard protocol 
described in the Invitrogen guidelines, that is, growing cells in minimal glycerol medium and 
subsequently transferring growing cells to a shake flask with fresh minimal methanol medium 
[21]. As previously described [22], ROL expression levels in shake flasks were rather low, close \n\n 
 
 
127 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
to the detection limit of the lipase activity assay, making it difficult to assess clonal variation and 
perform a reliable clone ranking. 
6.2.2  Microbioreactor cultivation 
As a collaboration, the experimental work of this section was carried out by m2p-labs team 
(Baesweiler, Germany) at their facilities.  
6.2.2.1 Effects of cultivation media in clone screening 
In order to check the effect of cultivation media in clone screening two different media were 
selected: YNB and Syn6. Clone screening was conducted similarly to the proposal in 
Invitrogen’s guide [21] and as applied often in literature [16,23–27]: Clones were grown in the 
selected media, following induction of PAOX1 -driven expression by daily addition of methanol. In 
contrast to YNB medium, Syn6 medium and its variants are known to promote high cell densities 
and product titers [28]. 
Syn6 medium showed better performance in terms of lipolytic activity than YNB (Figure 6.1).  
 
Figure 6.1 C lone rankings obtained in YNB (A) after 80 h and Syn6 medium (B) after 72 h during MBR 
cultivations. Ranking criteria was volumetric lipolytic activity. 
\n\n 
 
 
128 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Nine of twelve clones showed greater activity lipolytic than 0.05 U mL-1, but in YNB medium only 
one clone did. On the other hand, the ranking of clones was different when comparing the two 
media, i.e. clone 2 was the best one in YNB, while in Syn6 medium the best clones were 9 and 
4. 
In terms of clonal variation, the series of clones possibly containing multiple copies of the ROL 
gene, showed greater variability than the HAC1-transformants series. Strikingly, some of the 
clones presumably harboring multiple ROL copies (clones 11 and 12) produced almost no 
detectable activity in any of the growth conditions tested. Previous studies [22,29] have shown 
that ROL triggers the unfolded protein stress response (UPR), resulting in reduced biomass 
yields [30]. Moreover, recent studies suggest that increased ROL copy number could result in 
increased stress levels and, consequently, to a stronger reduction in biomass and product yields 
[31]. Undetectable lipolytic activity in clones 7, 11 and 12 was consistent with the observation that 
these clones reached higher biomass levels than the producing clones, that is, no metabolic 
burden was observed as a result of ROL production. This suggests that these clones might 
present some genetic modification(s) because of the transformation and clone selection 
process [32] that resulted in reduced or no active product formation. 
In order to check the performance of the different clones in this screening, further bioprocess 
development with clones 4, 6 and 7 (as indicated in Figure 6.1) was conducted to justify the 
selection of a high-producing clone and to validate the scalability of the microbioreactor. 
6.2.2.2  Microbioreactor for evaluation of operational fed-batch strategies 
With the possibility of in parallel, but independently operated cultivations in the microbioreactor 
system, two fed-batch strategies for the clones were evaluated at the same time. The first 
strategy was based on feeding glucose as main carbon source by the enzymatic release of 
single glucose molecules from a soluble glucose polymer which cannot be metabolized by 
P. pastoris. To induce recombinant gene expression, methanol was added automatically to a 
final concentration of 1% v/v in intervals of 24 h. 
The second strategy was implemented by the pulsed addition of a mixture of glycerol (main 
carbon source), methanol (inducer) and NH4OH (N-source) at two different feeding rates. \n\n 
 
 
129 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
• Strategy 1: Enzymatic continuous glucose feeding with MeOH induction 
The time course of microbioreactor cultures in terms of biomass, lipolytic activity, pO2 and 
accumulated volume is shown in Figure 6.2.  
 
Figure 6.2 G rowth kinetics from RoboLector microbioreactor system for clone 4. Operational fed-batch 
strategy was enzymatic feeding of glucose with MeOH addition in 24 h intervals. (____) OD 600 ; (▲) lipolytic 
a
ctivity; (____) pO 2 and (____) volume. 
 
\n\n 
 
 
130 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Glucose is released at a nearly constant rate by enzymatic action on the glucosepolymer. Up to 
around 12 h, released glucose accumulates due to glucose consumption rate is lower than 
glucose release rate. After 12 h, accumulated glucose is exhausted, and glucose-limited growth 
occurs. Therefore, glucose concentration in the medium is zero. Thus, growth is limited by the 
glucose release rate clearly shown by pO
2 levels resting at a constant level between methanol 
consumption phases. 
The specific growth rate decreased along the fermentation from 0.035 to 0.012 h-1 as was 
expected due to the constant glucose release throughout the bioprocess. This low specific 
growth rate, far from the maximum value (0.2 h-1) helps the de-repression of PAOX1 [30]. The 
specific growth rate can be controlled by modulating the quantity of glucose-liberating enzyme 
avoiding glucose accumulation. ROL is produced along the fermentation with the highest 
specific production rate during the last 24 hours. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 \n\n 
 
 
131 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
 
• Strategy 2: Pulsed feeding of glycerol/MeOH 
The performance of biomass, lipolytic activity, pO2 and accumulated volume from pulse addition 
of a mixed substrate (glycerol/MeOH) at low rate of 2 µL h-1, and high rate of 4 µL h-1, is presented 
in figure 3 and figure 4, respectively. \n\n 
 
 
132 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 6.3 Growth kinetics from RoboLector microbioreactor syst em for clone 4. Operational fed-batch 
strategy was pulsed dosing of glycerol/MeOH at a rate of 2 µL h-1. (____) OD 600 ; (▲) lipolytic activity; (____) 
pO 2 and (____) volume. 
 
\n\n 
 
 
133 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 6.4 Growth kinetics from RoboLector microbioreactor system for clone 4. Operational 
fed-batch strategy was pulsed dosing of glycerol/MeOH at a rate of 4 µL h-1. ( ) OD 600 ; ( ) 
lipolytic activity; ( ) pO2 and ( ) volume 
 
\n\n 
 
 
134 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
The pO 2 time courses for both dosing rates demonstrate clearly, that the culture is able to 
metabolize previously added nutrients before the next substrate pulse bolus feed occurs. That 
means overfeeding does not occur. 
As expected, the specific growth rate at low feeding rate is lower than at a high feeding rate 
which is also reflected in ROL activity over time. Again, as observed in cultivations with 
enzymatic feeding of glucose with MeOH induction, the highest increase in lipolytic activity 
occurs during the last 24 hours. 
More interesting is the comparison between the specific activities with respect to biomass 
produced and methanol consumed (Table 6.1).  
Table 6.1 C omparison of process variables and specific activities for clone 4 under different fed-batch 
strategies in microbioreactor after 96 h. 
Fed-batch 
strategy 
Biomass  
[OD 600 ] 
ROL activity 
[U mL-1] 
Specific 
activity  
[U mL-1 OD 600 -1] 
MeOH 
added  
[mg] 
Final 
volume  
[mL] 
Specific 
activity on 
methanol  
[U mg -1MeOH ] 
Glucose 
feeding 
255 10.3 0.040 19 0.794 0.43 
Low 
glycerol 
feeding 
169 10.3 0.061 28.2 0.898 0.33 
High 
glycerol 
feeding 
222 16 0.072 56.4 1.026 0.29 
 
In terms of specific activity with respect to biomass produced, high glycerol feeding rate is the 
best strategy: 1.2-fold higher than low glycerol feeding rate and 1.8-fold higher than glucose 
feeding. However, specific activity with respect to methanol consumed should be the key 
variable for the comparison between the three strategies, because methanol is the inducer of 
the production and total methanol added was different for the three operational strategies. 
Comparing this parameter, glucose feeding is the best strategy, 1.3-fold higher than low glycerol 
feeding and 1.5-fold higher than high glycerol feeding. Thus, the methanol added is the key \n\n 
 
 
135 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
parameter in terms of maximizing ROL production. Studies using glycerol as co-substrate in Muts 
phenotype producing ROL demonstrated that there is an optimal relation µGly/µMeOH . When this 
specific relation is overcome a decrease in specific activity is observed [34]. Under the glycerol 
feeding rates tested, this relation has not been surpassed. 
6.2.2.3  Comparison of clone rankings for different fed-batch strategies in 
microbioreactor system 
Finally, the performances of the three selected clones were compared for the three fed-batch 
operational strategies and batch bioprocess (Figure 6.5). 
 
Figure 6.5 Comparison of clone ranking for clones 4 and 6 obtained in different cultivation modes in 
RoboLector microbioreactor system (single runs). Clone 7, which was also cultivated in STR next to clones 
4 and 6, produced hardly any product and is therefore not shown in the figure. Medium background was 
Syn6 production medium. A: Batch screening with methanol induction. B: Enzymatic glucose feeding with 
methanol induction. C: Feeding of glycerol/methanol at 4 µL h-1. D: Feeding of glycerol/methanol at 2 µL h-
1. Different scales are used in A (values between 0 to 8) and B to D (values between 0 to 80). 
\n\n 
 
 
136 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Interestingly, when the same background medium is used (Syn6 medium), the clone rankings 
are maintained between different cultivation modes, at least for the clones applied in this study. 
These results cannot be directly transferred to other hosts expressing other genes-of-interest, 
which highlights the need of tools like MBR when developing bioprocesses from scratch. This 
is supported by the observations in [35], where different clone rankings were obtained for two 
H. polymorpha  clone libraries when cultivating in batch mode on glycerol, batch mode on 
glucose and fed-batch mode on glucose. 
As expected, the lowest specific activities were observed in batch growth with subsequent 
MeOH addition every 24 hours, which were lower by one order of magnitude when compared 
with fed-batch strategies. The higher activities obtained in fed-batch cultivations facilitate the 
detection of the expressed product and at the same time ensures a more reliable clone 
selection. 
6.2.3  Lab scale bioreactor cultivations 
In the present study, it is of interest to demonstrate if clone ranking and fed-batch operational 
strategies could be transferred from a microbioreactor unit (800 µL) to a classical stirred tank 
bioreactor (3 L), with a scale-up factor covering three orders of magnitude (factor > 3000). 
Enzymatic glucose fed-batch mode and low feeding rate of glycerol/MeOH were the two 
selected strategies to compare scale up of the bioprocess with clone 4. The results obtained 
for both strategies are presented in Table 6.2, Figure 6.6 and Figure 6.7. 
Table 6.2 Comparison of process variables and specific activities for clone 4 under different fed-batch strategies in 
lab-scale bioreactor after 96 h. 
Fed-
batch  
strategy 
Biomas
s 
[OD 600 ] 
ROL activity 
[U mL-1] 
Specific activity  
[U mL-1 OD 600 -1] 
MeOH 
added  
[mg] 
Final 
volume  
[mL] 
Specific activity to 
methanol  
[U mg -1MeOH ] 
Glucose 
feeding 
138 
±4.2 
9.8±0.6 0.071  71010 3700 0.51 
Low 
glycerol 
feeding 
140±0.1 12±1.2 0.086 118350  3400 0.34 
 \n\n 
 
 
137 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.6 O perational fed-batch strategy of constant feeding of glucose with MeOH addition in 24 h 
intervals in lab scale bioreactor cultivating clone 4. ( ) OD600 ; ( ) lipolytic activity; ( ) pO2 and ( ) 
volume. 
 
0
3
6
9
12
0
50
100
150
200
0 24 48 72 96
Lipolytic Activity   [U mL-1]
OD600
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
0
20
40
60
80
100
0 24 48 72 96
Volume   [L]
pO2 [%]
Time   [h]\n\n 
 
 
138 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
 
 
Figure 6.7 Operational fed-batch strategy of pulsed addition of glycerol and MeOH in lab scale bioreactor cultivating 
clone 4. ( ) OD600 ; ( ) lipolytic activity; ( ) pO2 and ( ) volume. 
0
3
6
9
12
0
50
100
150
200
0 24 48 72 96
Lipolytic Activity   [U mL-1]
OD600
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
0
20
40
60
80
100
0 24 48 72 96
Volume   [L]
pO2 [%]
Time   [h]\n\n 
 
 
139 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
6.2.3.1 Comparison of operational fed-batch strategies and scales 
One of the targets of the bioprocess scale up was to obtain similar oxygen consumption profile 
to avoid that differences in the ROL production could be attributed to the different oxygen 
transfer conditions. Aeration conditions in lab bioreactor were chosen in order to get a similar 
OTR to that in the microbioreactor, in which OTR values of 50 – 65 mmol L-1 h-1 were determined 
with the method of sulphite oxidation [36] for the applied operating conditions, as specified in 
materials & methods section. Similar oxygen profiles were obtained for both strategies in both 
bioreactors as can be seen from the comparison between using glucose (Figure 6.2, Figure 6.6) 
and using glycerol (Figure 6.3, Figure 6.7). 
The use of enzymatic release of glucose is an uncommon strategy for lab and industrial 
bioreactors, where feeding is realized by pumping concentrated nutrient solutions into the 
bioreactor. In MBR the enzymatic glucose release was estimated around 1 gGlucose L-1 h-1. This 
feeding rate was applied to lab bioreactor with a constant 500 µL glucose solution addition 
(300 g L-1) every 3 minutes. The final biomass concentration was lower in lab scale. According 
with this data, mean specific growth rate was 0.019 h-1 for STR versus 0.024 h -1 for MBR. 
Therefore, the glucose release rate of 1 gGlucose L-1 h-1 for the MBR was estimated lower than the 
real one. 
Nevertheless, similar lipolytic activity values were reached at the end of the bioprocess for both 
bioreactors (Table 6.1 and  
Table 6.2). Although the total methanol added per cultivation volume was slightly lower in STR, 
specific activity with respect to methanol was slightly higher, 1.2-fold. This fact could be related 
to the lower specific growth rate reached in lab bioreactor and subsequently a lower repression 
of P
AOX1 . 
Whereas glycerol and sorbitol are frequent co-substrates used in heterologous protein 
production under PAOX1 promoter, the use of glucose as co-substrate is rarely described in 
literature due to the strong repression of the promoter [37]. Nevertheless, recent chemostat 
studies have shown the potential of glucose as a co-substrate for the PAOX1 -based P. pastoris 
system under de-repressing conditions [30,38]. In contrast, the closely related methylotrophic \n\n 
 
 
140 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
yeast Hansenula polymorpha  shows high expression rates when grown on glucose as sole 
carbon source, even if expression of the gene-of-interest is driven by a promoter originating 
from its MeOH-assimilation pathway [28]. However, at this low constant glucose feeding rate 
the amount of glucose available to the culture is taken up immediately. As shown in recent 
chemostat studies performed under carbon-limiting conditions [30,38], this “carbon starvation” 
may expose P
AOX1  to de-repressing conditions, leading to full induction upon the addition of 
methanol. 
The scale-up of low glycerol feeding rate fed-batch strategy, from an operational point of view 
was more successful due to the better reproducibility of the feeding profile. The time courses 
of OD 600 , lipolytic activity, pO2 and volume are presented in Figure 6.7. pO2 was maintained at 
values higher than 20%, that is slightly higher than the one observed in microbioreactor (Figure 
6.3), where values lower than 20% were reached at the beginning of every mixed substrate 
addition pulse. However, in terms of lipolytic activity and specific activity with respect to 
methanol the values were quite similar (5 ‒ 15% difference) in both bioreactors. 
In terms of specific activity with respect to biomass, this value was 1.2-fold higher in lab 
bioreactor than in microbioreactor. A plausible explanation for such differences would be 
caused by the different dissolved oxygen profiles, since oxygen availability affects methanol 
assimilation rate and, in particular, 
AOX1  transcriptional levels [39], even in glucose-only growth 
conditions [40]. Transient oxygen-limiting conditions observed in microbioreactor cultivations 
after each methanol pulse may result in a reduction of 
AOX1  transcriptional levels, as previously 
shown in shake flask cultures equipped with pO2 online monitoring [41]. 
The comparison of lipolytic activity values reached for both strategies and bioreactors is 
presented in Figure 6.8. \n\n 
 
 
141 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 6.8 Comparison of fed-batch operational strategies and scales in respect to volumetric lipolytic 
activity for cultivations with clone 4 (X33-ROL-Hac1_sc5).  refers to lab scale bioreactor with 
glycerol/MeOH feeding,  to lab scale bioreactor with glucose and MeOH feeding,  to 
microbioreactor with glycerol/MeOH feeding and    to microbioreactor with glucose and MeOH 
feeding. 
 
The patterns of lipolytic activity time courses are quite similar, with a difference of less than 10% 
for the final lipolytic activity. 
For the verification of clone ranking in lab scale, clones 4, 6 and 7 were tested at low glycerol 
feeding rate fed-batch strategy. The lipolytic activity at 96 hours for both scales is shown in 
Figure 6.9 .  
0
3
6
9
12
0 24 48 72 96
Lipolytic Activity   [U mL-1]
Time   [h]\n\n 
 
 
142 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 6.9  Comparison of clone ranking after 96 h for microbioreactor and lab scale. Operational strategy 
was feeding of glycerol/MeOH at low rate. Ranking was judged by final volumetric lipolytic activity. 
 
Not only the ranking was maintained but also the activity levels reached were quite similar. 
These results are quite remarkable because in many cases clone selection made by 
conventional approaches like shake flask cultivations do not correspond with the production 
expectations when they are tested at lab or pilot plant scale.
0
3
6
9
12
Clone 4 Clone 6 Clone 7
Lipolytic Activity   [U mL-1]
Microbioreactor
Lab Scale\n\n 
 
 
143 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
6.3 Conclusions 
The results presented in this study demonstrate the feasibility of the RoboLector MBR system 
in bioprocess development with P. pastoris as microbial cell factory. The RoboLector MBR 
system proved to be an ideal tool regarding this application. In particular, the implementation 
of fed-batch strategies in microbioreactors has demonstrated the excellent performance for 
clone selection with the PAOX1 -based P. pastoris system using methanol as inducing substrate. 
Also, the results prove that the RoboLector platform is compatible with the use of a volatile and 
high O2-demanding substrate such as methanol. Furthermore, different operational fed-batch 
strategies at microscale for P. pastoris and clone screenings were performed and evaluated, 
which were scalable to conventional lab scale stirred tank bioreactor, covering three orders of 
magnitude (factor > 3000). In addition, the influence of media composition in clone selection 
was demonstrated. The capabilities of the RoboLector MBR system accounted for the success 
of the study: online monitoring of relevant fermentation parameters, integration of pipetting 
robot for manipulation of cultures at a high frequency based on online monitored data, utilization 
of FlowerPlates allowing up to 48-fold parallel cell culturing at elevated oxygen transfer rates 
and scalability of clone ranking and fed-batch operational strategies (particularly mixed feeds) 
into classical STR. With real-time insights into the metabolic behaviour of the individual cultures, 
it becomes possible to react also in real-time accordingly. Thus, the full potential of the 
automated liquid handling system integrated into the RoboLector MBR could be applied in our 
study. Moreover, the development of these strategies may be also suitable for clone screening 
and fermentation development with other industrially important expression hosts. 
In conclusion, the exciting area of MBR systems is still in motion to further expand the 
possibilities of such systems. Currently, there are more and more analytical systems which are 
designed to perform tasks for bioprocess development in a high-throughput manner. In future, 
the integration of such machines into already existing sophisticated systems like the RoboLector 
makes MBR even more powerful and will contribute to next-level biotechnological 
developments until complete upstream and downstream processing can be executed by MBR 
systems. \n\n 
 
 
144 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
6.4  Methods  
6.4.1 Organisms  
The P. pastoris X-33/pPICZ□ROL strain [20] was used as starting strain to generate a series of 
transformants co-overexpressing the spliced form of HAC1 from P. pastoris. Isolation the spliced 
form of HAC1 from P. pastoris was performed following a strategy based on [42].  
Competent P. pastoris cells were prepared and transformed according to [43]. The pPIC3.5K-
HAC1splicedwas linearized in the HIS4 gene with NcoI for integration targeting of the construct 
in this locus. Transformants were plated on YPD agar plates containing 250 mg L-1geneticin. In 
order to verify the integration of the HAC1spliced cassette, a PCR was performed on purified 
genomic DNA of the transformants with the forward primer 5’-GACTGGTTCCAATTGACAAGC-
3’ (AOX1  promoter region) and the reverse primer 5’-GCCGCCTATTCCTGGAAGAATAC-3’, with 
the following cycling conditions: 2 min 95 °C, followed by 35 cycles of 45 s at 94 °C, 45 s at 
55 °C, 1 min 72 °C. 
The series of strains potentially having multiple copies of the ROL expression cassette was 
obtained by transforming X-33 (Invitrogen) competent cells with pPICZαA-ROL [29], as 
described in [39]. 
6.4.2  Cultivation media 
Syn6 production medium contained per liter: 20 g glycerol; 7.66 g (NH4)2SO 4; 9 g K2HPO 4; 3.3 g 
KCl; 3 g MgSO4·7 H2O; 0.33 g NaCl; 0.1 mol MES; 4.202 g citric acid·H2O; 1 g CaCl2·H2O; 10 mL 
vitamin solution; 10 mL micro elements solution and 10 mL trace elements solution. Vitamin 
solution contained per 100 mL: 20 mg d-Biotin and 2 g Thiamine·HCl. Micro elements solution 
contained per 100 mL: 1 g (NH4)2Fe(SO4)2·6 H2O; 0.08 g CuSO 4·5 H2O; 0.3 g ZnSO 4·7 H2O; 0.4 g 
MnSO 4·H2O and 1 g Titriplex III. Trace elements solution contained per 20 mL: 2 mg 
NiSO 4·6 H2O; 2 mg CoCl2·6 H2O; 2 mg H3BO 3; 2 mg KI and 2 mg Na2MoO 4·2 H2O. The pH-value 
of the medium was adjusted to 6.4 with KOH. Cultivations with enzymatic glucose release were 
conducted with a proprietary formulation based on a Syn6 medium. \n\n 
 
 
145 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
YNB screening medium contained per liter: 10 g glycerol; 1.34 g Yeast Nitrogen Base without 
amino acids and ammonium (Difco); 5 g (NH 4)2SO 4; 0.4 mg d-Biotin and 0.1 mol 
Na 2HPO 4/NaH 2PO 4 (pH 6.0). 
YPD preculturing medium contained per liter: 10 g yeast extract, 20 g peptone, 20 g glucose. 
6.4.3 Shake flasks cultivations 
Triplicate shake flask cultures were performed as follows: 25 mL of BMG medium were 
inoculated with a fresh colony and incubated over night at 25 °C and 150 rpm (Infors Shaker, 
25 mm shaking diameter). After 20 hours, cells were centrifuged (3000 x g, 5 min) and 
resuspended into 25 mL BMM medium to an initial OD
600  of 1.0. After 24 hours of induced 
expression, OD600  and lipolytic activity of the cultures were measured. 
6.4.4  Microbioreactor cultivations 
The microbioreactor was a RoboLector system, which consists of a BioLector device (G-BL-100, 
m2p-labs, Baesweiler, Germany) integrated into a PerkinElmer Multiprobe II Ex liquid handling 
robot. The BioLector device monitored from a incubated microplate the following parameters 
for each well of the microplates within a measurement interval of 13 min: scattered light 
(proportional to biomass concentration), riboflavin fluorescence (λ
Ex. = 488 nm, λEm. = 520 nm), 
NAD(P)H fluorescence (λEx. = 365 nm, λEm. = 450 nm) and dissolved oxygen tension (DO or pO2) 
via integrated optodes in the bottom of the microplate’s wells. Scattered light readings were 
translated into OD600  with values determined at end of the MBR cultivations. The incubation 
chamber of the BioLector device controlled relative humidity above 85% to minimize 
evaporation from the microplate’s wells. 
Cultivations were carried out exclusively in 48 well FlowerPlates (MTP-48-BO, m2p-labs, 
Baesweiler, Germany), shaking frequency of1100 rpm, shaking diameter of 3 mm, initial volume 
of 800 µL per well, maximum allowed volume of 1100 µL per well due to volume increase caused 
by feeding.Cultivation temperature was 28 °C. FlowerPlates were sealed with a gas permeable 
membrane with a pre-slitted silicone layer (F-GPRS48-10, m2p-labs, Baesweiler, Germany) for 
penetration by robotic tips. MeOH addition of 8 µL was programmed in 24 h intervals for 
cultivations conducted in batch mode and enzymatic glucose fed-batch mode. Feeding of the \n\n 
 
 
146 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
nutrient mixture (200 g L-1 glycerol, 25% v/v MeOH and 1.5% w/w NH4OH) was programmed to 
start after 24 h with a pulsing rate of 4 µL or 8 µL every 2 h (i.e. 2 µL h-1 or 4 µL h-1). Automated 
sampling was programmed in 24 h intervals for all cultivation modes. Feeding and sampling was 
performed without interruption of shaking. Sampling volume was 10 µL. Assay of lipolytic activity 
performed immediately at-line to MBR cultivations after sampling. Cultivations were started with 
initial OD
600  of 2.5, inoculated from precultures grown overnight in 20 mL YPD medium in 
250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks, at a shaking frequency of 250 rpm, a shaking diameter of 25 mm 
and 28 °C. 
6.4.5  Bioreactor cultivations 
Pre-inoculum for bioreactor cultures were grown for 24 h in 1 L baffled shake flasks at 30 °C, 
150 rpm, in YPD medium containing 1 mL of a zeocin solution (100 mg mL-1, InvivoGen). Shake 
flasks contained 200 mL of YPD medium. The culture was centrifuged at 8000 rpm, 15 min and 
the harvested cells were re-suspended in bioreactor culture medium and used to inoculate a 
5 L Biostat B bioreactor (Braun Biotech, Melsungen, Germany) at an initial optical density of 3. 
Cells were cultured under the following cultivation conditions: initial volume 3 L, stirring rate 
600 rpm, temperature 28 °C, pH controlled at 5.0 by adding NH
4OH 30% (v/v), air flow rate 
3 L min-1. The cultivation started with a 20 g L-1 glycerol batch phase. When glycerol was 
exhausted, fed-batch phase was initiated, lasting for approximately 72 hours. 
6.4.6  Biomass  analysis 
Biomass analysis was performed by measuring triplicates of the optical density at a wave length 
of 600 nm in cuvettes of 1 cm path length.  
6.4.7  Lipolytic activity assay  
Samples from MBR cultivations were diluted with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and analyzed 
for lipolytic activity at 30 °C in 96 well microplates using a TECAN microplate reader pre-heated 
to 30 °C. Dilution factor of samples was 20 and resulted in a linear increase of absorption at 
410 nm for at least five minutes. 10 µL of diluted sample were mixed with 190 µL of freshly 
prepared reaction mix (1 volume of 30 mg p-nitrophenylpalmitate (pNPP) in 10 mL isopropanol 
and 9 volumes of 90 mL potassium phosphate buffer (100 mM, pH 8) containing 111.1 mg gum 
arabic and 207 mg sodium deoxycholate). For calculation of released amount of p-nitrophenol \n\n 
 
 
147 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
(pNP) from pNPP under assay conditions, a calibration was done by using 10 µL of a pNP solution 
with known concentrations instead of 10 µL diluted sample. Measurement interval of absorption 
readings at 410 nm was set to 45 s, with 10 s of shaking before each measurement. Increase in 
absorption due to autohydrolysisof pNPPcould not be detected during measurement time. 
Volumetric activity under assay conditions for the release of 1 µM of pNP per min per mL of 
sample volume was calculated as follows: Activity [U mL
-1] = A410 nm [a.u. min-1] * Slope of pNP-
calibration [µmolpNPL-1a.u. -1] * dilution factor * 0.001. 
For bioreactor cultures, extracellular lipolytic activity was measured by using a p-
nitrophenylbutyrate (pNPB) assay. Cells were removed by centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 3 min). 
Then, samples were diluted with PBS and lipolytic activity was followed spectophotometrically 
in a cary Varian 300 spectophotometer (Varian Inc., Palo Alto, USA) at 30 °C after mixing in a 1 
mL cuvette 40 µl of sample and 960 µL of freshly prepared, pre-warmed reaction mix (1 volume 
of 19 mg pNPB in 10 mL isopropanol mixed with 9 volumes of 250 mMTris-HCl, pH 7.5). Linear 
increase of absorption at 410 nm was followed for five minutes. Volumetric activity under assay 
conditions for the release of 1 µM of pNP per min per mL of sample volume was calculated as 
follows: Activity [U mL
-1] = A410 nm [a.u. min-1] * Slope of pNP-calibration [µmolpNP L-1 a.u.-1] * dilution 
factor * 0.001. In order to compare data a correlation between both methods (pNPP and pNPB) 
was conducted, applying a ROL dilution series with known concentration in the two methods. \n\n 
 
 
148 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
6.5  References 
[1] C.L. Brooks, M. Morrison, M. Joanne Lemieux, Rapid expression screening of eukaryotic 
membrane proteins in Pichia pastoris, Protein Sci. 22 (2013) 425-433. 
[2] B.K. Lundholt, K.M. Scudder, L. Pagliaro, A simple technique for reducing edge effect in 
cell-based assays, J. Biomol. Screen. 8 (2003) 566-570. 
[3] P. Rohe, D. Venkanna, B. Kleine, R. Freudl, M. Oldiges, An automated workflow for 
enhancing microbial bioprocess optimization on a novel microbioreactor platform, Microb. 
Cell Fact. 11:144 (2012).  
[4] R. Puskeiler, K. Kaufmann, D. Weuster-Botz, Development, parallelization, and automation 
of a gas-inducing milliliter-scale bioreactor for high-throughput bioprocess design (HTBD), 
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 89 (2005) 512-523. 
[5] M. Funke, A. Buchenauer, W. Mokwa, S. Kluge, L. Hein, C. Müller, F. Kensy, J. Büchs, 
Bioprocess control in microscale: Scalable fermentations in disposable and user-friendly 
microfluidic systems, Microb. Cell Fact. 9:86 (2010). 
[6] M. Funke, S. Diederichs, F. Kensy, C. Müller, J. Büchs, The baffled microtiter plate: 
Increased oxygen transfer and improved online monitoring in small scale fermentations, 
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 103 (2009) 1118-1128. 
[7] K. Isett, H. George, W. Herber, A. Amanullah, Twenty-four-well plate miniature bioreactor 
high-throughput system: Assessment for microbial cultivations, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 98 
(2007) 1017-1028. 
[8] K. Baumann, N. Adelantado, C. Lang, D. Mattanovich, P. Ferrer, Protein trafficking, 
ergosterol biosynthesis and membrane physics impact recombinant protein secretion in 
Pichia pastoris, Microb. Cell Fact. 10:93 (2011). 
[9] M. Boettner, C. Steffens, C. Mering von, P. Bork, U. Stahl, C. Lang, Sequence-based factors 
influencing the expression of heterologous genes in the yeast Pichia pastoris - A 
comparative view on 79 human genes, J. Biotechnol. 130 (2007) 1-10. \n\n 
 
 
149 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
[10] S. Curvers, P. Brixius, T. Klauser, J. Thömmes, D. Weuster-Botz, R. Takors, C. Wandrey, 
Human Chymotrypsinogen B production with Pichia pastoris by integrated development of 
fermentation and downstream processing. Part 1. Fermentation, Biotechnol. Prog. 17 (2001) 
495-502. 
[11] T. Anderlei, W. Zang, M. Papaspyrou, J. Büchs, Online respiration activity measurement 
(OTR, CTR, RQ) in shake flasks, Biochem. Eng. J. 17 (2004) 187-194. 
[12] T. Anderlei, J. Büchs, Device for sterile online measurement of the oxygen transfer rate in 
shaking flasks, Biochem. Eng. J. 3478 (2000) 1-6. 
[13] X. Qin, J. Qian, G. Yao, Y. Zhuang, S. Zhang, J. Chu, GAP promoter library for fine-tuning of 
gene expression in Pichia pastoris, App. Env. Microbiol. 77 (2011) 3600-3608. 
[14] F.S. Hartner, C. Ruth, D. Langenegger, S.N. Johnson, P. Hyka, G.P. Lin-Cereghino, J. Lin-
Cereghino, K. Kovar, J.M. Cregg, A. Glieder: Promoter library designed for fine-tuned gene 
expression in 
Pichia pastoris, Nucleic Acids Res. 36(12):e76 (2008). 
[15] A.G. Sandström, K. Engström, J. Nyhlen, A. Kasrayan, J. Bäckvall, Directed evolution of 
Candida antarctica lipase A using an episomaly replicating yeast plasmid, Protein Eng. Des. 
Sel. 22 (2009) 413-420. 
[16] A. Murasugi, Y. Tohma-Aiba, Comparison of three signals for secretory expression of 
recombinant human midkine in Pichia pastoris, Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 65 (2001) 
2291-2293. 
[17] R. Legmann, B. Benoit, R.W. Fedechko, C. L. Deppeler, S. Srinivasan, R.H. Robins, E.L. 
McCormick, D.A. Ferrick, S.T. Rodgers, A.P. Russo: A strategy for clone selection under 
different production conditions, Biotechnol. Prog. 27 (2011) 757-765. 
[18] F. Kensy, E. Zang, C. Faulhammer, R. Tan, J. Büchs, Validation of a high-throughput 
fermentation system based on online monitoring of biomass and fluorescence in 
continuously shaken microtiter plates, Microb. Cell Fact. 8:31 (2009). \n\n 
 
 
150 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
[19] R. Huber, D. Ritter, T. Hering, A. Hillmer, F. Kensy, C. Müller, L. Wang, J. Büchs, Robo-Lector 
- A novel platform for automated high-throughput cultivations in microtiter plates with high 
information content, Microb. Cell Fact. 8:42 (2009). 
[20] S. Minning, A. Serrano, P. Ferrer, C. Solá, R.D. Schmid, F. Valero, Optimization of the high-
level production of Rhizopus oryzae lipase in Pichia pastoris, J. Biotechnol. 86 (2001) 59-
70. 
[21] Thermofisher: Pichia fermentation process guidelines version Version B053002. Available 
online: https://tools.thermofisher.com/content/sfs/manuals/pichiaferm_prot.pdf, last 
accessed 10/07/2017. 
[22] D. Resina, M. Maurer, O. Cos, C. Arnau, M. Carnicer, H. Marx, B. Gasser, F. Valero, D. 
Mattanovich, P. Ferrer, Engineering of bottlenecks in 
Rhizopus oryzae lipase production in 
Pichia pastoris using the nitrogen source-regulated FLD1 promoter, N. Biotechnol. 25 
(2009) 396-403. 
[23] S. Kim, Optimization of the functional expression of Coprinuscinereus peroxidase in Pichia 
pastoris by varying the host and promoter, J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 19 (2009) 966-971. 
[24] C.C. Lee, T.G. Williams, D.W. Wong, G.H. Robertso, An episomal expression vector for 
screening mutant gene libraries in Pichia pastoris, Plasmid 54 (2005) 80-85. 
[25] M. Mack, M. Wannemacher, B. Hobl, P. Pietschmann, B. Hock, Comparison of two 
expression platforms in respect to protein yield and quality: Pichia pastoris versus Pichia 
angusta , Protein Express. Purif. 66 (2009) 165-171. 
[26] S. Hellwig, F. Emde, N.P.G. Raven, M. Henke, P. van der Logt, R. Fischer, Analysis of single-
chain antibody production in Pichia pastoris using on-line methanol control in fed-batch 
and mixed-feed fermentations, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 74 (2001) 344-352. 
[27] S. Hellwig, F. Robin, J. Drossard, N.P.G. Raven, C. Vaquero-Martin, J.E. Shively, R. Fischer, 
Production of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) N-A3 domain in Pichia pastoris by 
fermentation, Biotechnol. Appl. Biochem. 30 (1999) (Pt 3) 267-275. \n\n 
 
 
151 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
[28] A.F. Mayer, K. Hellmuth, H. Schlieker, R. Lopez-Ulibarri, S. Oertel, U. Dahlems, A.W. Strasser 
, A.P. van Loon, An expression system matures: a highly efficient and cost-effective process 
for phytase production by recombinant strains of Hansenula polymorpha , Biotechnol. 
Bioeng. 63 (1999) 373-381. 
[29] D. Resina, M. Bollók, N.K. Khatri, F. Valero, P. Neubauer, P. Ferrer, Transcriptional response 
of P. pastoris in fed-batch cultivations to Rhizopus oryzae lipase production reveals UPR 
induction, Microb. Cell Fact. 6:21 (2007). 
[30] J. Jordà, P. Jouhten, E. Cámara, H. Maaheimo, J. Albiol, P. Ferrer, Metabolic flux profiling of 
recombinant protein secreting Pichia pastoris growing on glucose:methanol mixtures. 
Microb. Cell Fact. 11:57 (2012). 
[31] E. Cámara, J. Jordà, P. Jouhten, H. Maaheimo, J. Albiol, P. Ferrer, Impact of recombinant 
protein production on the energy metabolism of Pichia pastoris growing on 
glucose:methanol mixtures, [Abstract]. 2nd Conference on Microbial Stress: from molecules 
to systems, Belgirate, Italy. 2012. 
[32] J.M. Viader-Salvadó, E.L. Cab-Barrera, L.J. Galán-Wong, M. Guerrero, M. Guerrero-Olazarán 
Genotyping of recombinant Pichia pastoris strains. Cell Mol Biol Lett 2006, 11:348-359. 
[33] A. Surribas, D. Resina, P. Ferrer, F. Valero F, Riboflavin may interfere with on-line monitoring 
of secreted green fluorescence protein fusion proteins in Pichia pastoris, Microb. Cell Fact. 
6:15 (2007). 
[34] C. Arnau, C. Casas, F. Valero, The effect of glycerol mixed substrate on the heterologous 
production of a Rhizopus oryzae lipase in Pichia pastoris system, Biochem. Eng. J. 57 (2011) 
30-37. 
[35] M. Scheidle, M. Jeude, B. Dittrich, S. Denter, F. Kensy, M. Suckow, D. Klee, J. Büchs, High-
throughput screening of Hansenula polymorpha clones in the batch compared with the 
controlled-release fed-batch mode on a small scale. FEMS Yeast Res. 10 (2010) 83-92. 
 \n\n 
 
 
152 
 
6. Microbioreactors Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
[36] R. Hermann, N. Walther, U. Maier, J. Büchs, Optical method for the determination of the 
oxygen-transfer capacity of small bioreactors based on sulfite oxidation, Biotechnol. 
Bioeng. 74 (2001) 355-363. 
[37] H. Hang, X. Ye, M. Guo, J. Chu, Y. Zhuang, M. Zhang, S. Zhang, A simple fermentation 
strategy for high-level production of recombinant phytase by Pichia pastoris using glucose 
as the growth substrate, Enzy. Microb. Technol. 44 (2009) 185-188. 
[38] L. Paulová, P. Hyka, B. Branská, K. Melzoch, K. Kovar, Use of a mixture of glucose and 
methanol as substrates for the production of recombinant trypsinogen in continuous 
cultures with 
Pichia pastoris Mut+. J. Biotechnol. 157 (2012) 180-188. 
[39] S. Kim, S. Warburton, I. Boldogh, C. Svensson, L. Pon, M. d'Anjou, T.A. Stadheim, B. Choi, 
Regulation of alcohol oxidase 1 (AOX1) promoter and peroxisome biogenesis in different 
fermentation processes in 
Pichia pastoris, J Biotechnol 2013, 166:174-181. 
[40] K. Baumann, M. Carnicer, M. Dragosits, A.B. Graf, J. Stadlmann, P. Jouhten, H. Maaheimo, 
B. Gasser, J. Albiol, D. Mattanovich, P. Ferrer, A multi-level study of recombinant Pichia 
pastoris in different oxygen conditions, BMC Syst. Biol. 4:141 (2010). 
[41] M. Ruottinen, M. Bollok, M. Kogler, A. Neubauer, M. Krause, E. Hamalainen, J. Myllyharju, A. 
Vasala, P. Neubauer, Improved production of human type II procollagen in the yeast Pichia 
pastoris in shake flasks by a wireless-controlled fed-batch system, BMC Biotechnol. 8:33 
(2008). 
[42] M. Guerfal, S. Ryckaert, P.P. Jacobs, P. Ameloot, K. van Craenenbroeck, R. Derycke, N. 
Callewaert, The HAC1 gene from Pichia pastoris: characterization and effect of its 
overexpression on the production of secreted, surface displayed and membrane proteins, 
Microb. Cell Fact. 9:49 (2010). 
[43] J. Lin-Cereghino, W.W. Wong, S. Xiong, W. Giang, L.T. Luong, J. Vu, S.D. Johnson, G.P. Lin-
Cereghino, Condensed protocol for competent cell preparation and transformation of  
 
the methylotrophic yeast 
Pichia pastoris., BioTechniques 38:44 (2005) 46, 48. \n\n 
 
 153 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
7 UPGRADING TO THE FIRST STEP UP TO INDUSTRY. 
PILOT PLANT SCALE PRODUCTION OF ROL BY Pichia 
pastoris UNDER PAOX1  CONTROL 
7.1 Introduction 
As stated in the first chapter of this dissertation, the full development of a bioprocess 
culminates in its scaling up to the industrial scale. Generally, chemical processes are 
developed in the smallest scale possible for them to be generally transferred up to a factor 
of about 50000, or even 80000 for fixed bed reactors [1].  
 
Figure 7.1.  Facilities of a pilot plant fermentation process from Northeast Biomanufacturing Center 
and Collaborative (Blue Bell, PA) [2]. 
In fermentation processes, the old rule of thumb of using a 10 factor has still been applied 
during the last decades, due to the higher uncertainty they present in respect to chemical 
ones. For example, a scale up of the production of a monoclonal antibody in a mammalian 
cell culture from 3 L to 2500 L was carried out using 4 steps of increasing volume [3]. Also, 
Martinez and his coworkers [4] successfully accomplished a step of 10-increasing factor 
in lab scale of an immobilized 
P. pastoris culture. Recently, as well, Vaz de Arruda et al. 
\n\n 
 
 154 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
(2017) [5] reproduced the production of xylitol by Candida guilliermondii in three different 
scales of stirred tank bioreactors, from 2.4 to 125 L.  
7.1.1 Scaling up of bioprocesses. General issues 
The final step of bringing a bioprocess up to the production scale is particularly 
challenging, due to the large number of process variables that are seriously affected by 
the change of scale, from physical and chemical, to essential biological parameters [6]. 
In the first place, geometric particular features of the vessel and its elements can cause 
foam, mixing problems, shear stress and heat transfer limitation, among others. 
Concretely, mixing times of reactors around the scale of 10-50 L oscillate between 1-5 s, 
while in the 100-500 L scale fit in the 20-30 s and the 10000 L, on the other hand, can 
reach 2 min [6]. Villadsen 
et al. (2011) appointed mixing as the main issue to deal with at 
the time of scaling up a bioprocess, where three different phases are simultaneously 
present, and attributed, literally, the 60 % of problems associated with industrial processes 
to inadequate mixing. Uniformity then, is complex to achieve due to mass transfer 
limitations, especially when trying to supply any substrate in a gaseous phase. For 
instance, algae cultures are completely dependent on CO
2 as the main carbon source. 
Therefore, defective mixing may trigger direct process limitations that jeopardize 
reproducibility from little scale. Sedimentation of biomass may be, as well, a consequence 
of this lack of heterogeneity.  
Apart from that, when operating large scale bioreactors, other features must be taken into 
consideration, such as sterility or cleaning, which, despite not being included in the 
bioprocess itself, seriously affect the productivity of the process.  
Besides the commented gradients caused by inadequate mixing, some other factors, 
reasonably easy to handle with in small scales, are a serious concern at industrial and 
even pilot ones. For instance, multiple feed inlets, which can compromise homogeneity. 
On the other hand, dangerous or flammable are much more regulated and restricted 
industrial scale, because of its potential hazard is not comparable as when is used at little 
scales.  \n\n 
 
 155 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Secondly, limitations from a chemical nature, like gradients of pH, temperature, viscosity 
may be a problem in large scales. As well, cleaning, flexibility for alternate use and 
accessibility to all the internal area of the vessel are exponentially more complex as scale 
increases. They may seem simple or straightforwardly recognizable, but Reisman (1993) 
[6] exemplifies in his review, apart from other issues already appointed, some of the main 
problems which commonly arise at large scale fermenters:  
Non-scalability of some time-based recipes. This fact can be due to many reasons: 
enlargement of filling/emptying times, of heating/cooling cycles, mixing limitations or even 
regulatory or safety issues. 
The complexity of guaranteeing sterility in large vessels or restricted areas. 
Finally, in a more biological aspect of the matter, concerns of the age of the culture are 
utterly important, especially at very large scales where intermediate steps of inoculation 
are needed. Solà and Gòdia (1994) [1] illustrate very reasonably the dependence of the 
number of generations (N
g) on the final volume (V) by the following equation, assuming 
exponential growth: 
 = 1.44 ln + ln

   
Equation 7.1 
Where X is the final biomass concentration and x0 the initial number of cells in the original 
inoculum. 
7.1.2 Scaling-up methods 
It is highly probable that, at least once, every person belonging to the field of bioprocess 
engineering have heard the statement “scaling-up is an art”. It is true that most successful 
are based on experience, and there exist no ultimate rule to follow, or at least no rule that 
can be considered to stand up among the rest. Hereon are some of them briefly 
presented.  
First, one of the most applied rules of thumb is the concept of similarity [1], which is easily 
explained by Equation 7.2: \n\n 
 
 156 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 =   
Equation 7.2  
Where m is an arbitrary process variable and k, the scale factor; m’ is the scaled value of 
m. The basis of similarity takes ground by the following idea, if two systems can be 
described by the same differential equation system, then it can be assumed that with the 
same contour constraints, both systems will behave the same way.  
Depending on the concrete bioprocess and its limitations, some of the following examples 
of similarities should be considered. They are classified according to a few classes of 
similarities, which, normally, in this order, one is a prerequisite of the following ones: 
Geometric, dynamic, thermal, mass concentration and biochemical similarity [1]. 
Among this classes of similarities, the most common are constant gas power input per 
liquid volume (P
g/V), shear stress, oxygen transfer rate (OTR) or global volumetric gas 
transfer coefficient (kLa). 
7.1.3 Oxygen transfer 
As commented, there exist numerous factors that can trigger process limitations when 
processes are brought up to larger scale, such as substrate availability in the whole 
volume, light requirements by photosynthetic organisms or even foam formation, 
among many others. Oxygen transport to the cells, though, stands out among the 
rest, as most industrial bioprocesses are aerobic, and is a molecule with a very low 
solubility in water (between 2.0 and 2.8 · 10
-4 mol O2 L-1 at common bioprocess 
temperatures, 20-40ºC). 
OTR depends proportionally on the volumetric gas transfer coefficient (kLa), as Equation 
7.3 explains: 
 =  · 
∗ −   
Equation 7.3 
Where OTR (molO2 L s-1); kLa (s-1); kL, the individual coefficient of mass transfer (m s-1); a, the 
interphase superficial area between the gas phase and the liquid (m2m -3). C*O2 (mg L-1) is 
the saturation oxygen concentration in the liquid phase.  \n\n 
 
 157 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
kLa is dependent and can be correlated to stirrer speed (N), gas superficial velocity (vs), 
power input per volume (P/V) and liquid effective viscosity (µe) [7], as the following 
expression asserts: 
 = ! "#
$ %

&
'(
)  
Equation 7.4  
Being K, a, b and c parameters of the correlation.  
At the same time, from oxygen individual mass balance (liquid phase), it can be deduced:  
* =  +
+
+,  
Equation 7.5  
* = - = .  
Equation 7.6 
 
Where OUR, or rO2, is the oxygen uptake rate (molO2 L-1 h-1); qO2 , the specific oxygen uptake 
rate (molO2 gX -1 h-1), and X (gX L-1), the biomass concentration. 
7.1.4 Scaling up vs. change of scale  
The case here presented is not strictly a scale up, but rather the adaptation of the 
conditions of the already productive process of production of ROL under the control of 
P
AOX1  up to a scale of 50 L, carried out in an already built up commercial bioreactor. 
Geometric similarity is not, then a variable that can be manipulated or used as a design 
parameter. Shear stress, on the other hand, can be manipulated as well as both mass and 
energy transfer.  
The challenge that came up consisted on mimicking the oxygen transfer conditions 
carried out at 5 L, in this case, DO was selected as the parameter to be similar in pilot 
scale, due to the lack of off-gas analysis in that situation that would have allowed to 
estimate OTR along the process. However, it has already been demonstrated that the 
physiology of the cell, regarding growth and substrate consumption kinetics, along with \n\n 
 
 158 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
the production and secretion of active ROL, is dependent on the availability of oxygen [8]. 
This is reflected on a limitation at normoxic conditions (DO>0), at the extremes the range 
of 0-50 %, and being optimum at mild concentrations. So that, it was of extreme 
importance to transfer those conditions to that larger scale, apart from the operational 
strategy specifications regarding methanol feeding. 
7.2 Objectives 
The main purposes conceived to fulfill with the work of the present section of the 
dissertation are diverse and listed followingly:  
• To transfer the production of 
Rhizopus oryzae lipase (ROL) by P. pastoris from the lab 
scale to a to a 10-times larger scale. The process was regulated by the AOX1  promoter, 
using a methanol non-limited fed-batch (MNLFB) strategy. This has been reported, both 
published and in other chapters of this thesis, to be the most productive (in terms of 
volumetric productivity, QP) among strategies that employ methanol as a sole carbon 
source.  
• To outcome the main issues that are originated from a change of scale, and stablish 
their causes. In this matter, oxygen transfer stands among the rest, and will be 
thoroughly discussed all along. 
• Finally, to kinetically study the behavior of the culture in function of the oxygen 
availability, in terms of production, but also growth and substrate uptake. 
7.3 Materials and methods 
7.3.1 Bioreactors and process development in different scales 
The set of different bioreactors employed for the results of the present document, both 
bench-top and pilot scale ones, have already been listed in chapter 3.  
Barrigón, in his PhD dissertation (2015) [9] gathered together, in a single figure, the k
La 
specifications of all bioreactors used in this chapter in either scale, among others, in 
function of the stirring rate and vvm of air: \n\n 
 
 159 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 7.2  kLa specifications for different bioreactors in function of the stirring rate and vvm of air 
[9]. 
From what is shown in Figure 7.2, Biostat UD (pilot, 50 L) offers a higher profile of kLa for 
all stirring rate in comparison to Biostat B (5 L) and Biobundle (7 L).  
So, a priori, if the criterion that is pursued is maintaining a similar kLa, so that OTR is also 
alike during the fermentation, then stirring rate at Biostat UD fermentations must 
necessarily be lower. Concretely, if methanol induction phases at bench-top scale are 
carried out at 1000 rpm and 1 vvm, then the stirring rate in the Biostat UD should be 
maintained around 500 rpm. 
Pilot scale cultures were carried out in a 50 L Biostat UD (Sartorius) in fed-batch operation 
mode.  
Initial volume was set at 20 L. Cells were inoculated in basal salts medium (BSM), which 
contained, per liter of distilled water: H
3PO4 (85%) 26.7 mL, CaSO4 0.93 g, K2SO 4 18.2 g, 
MgSO 4·7H2O 14.9 g, KOH 4.13 g, glycerol 40 g, 2 mL of biotin solution (20 mg L−1), 5 mL of 
trace salts solution and 0.5 mL of antifoam agent (A6426, Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, 
MO, USA). Trace salts solution was composed, per liter of distilled water, of CuSO4·5H 2O 
\n\n 
 
 160 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
6.0 g, NaI 0.08 g, MnSO4·H2O 3.0 g, Na2MoO 4·2H 2O 0.2 g, H3BO 3 0.02 g, CoCl2 0.5 g, 
ZnCl2 20.0 g, FeSO4·7H2O 65.0 g, biotin 0.3 g, H2SO 4 98 % 5 ml.  
The fermentation was performed as described elsewhere [8], being divided into the 
phases of glycerol batch (GBP), transition (TP) and methanol induction (MIP).  
This last stage was performed according to the conditions that wanted to be reproduced 
from the lab scale. The strategy used consisted on a methanol non-limited fed batch 
(MNLFB), controlling methanol concentration at a set point of 3 g L-1 during the MIP. DO, 
as stated, was mimicked from the bench-top process, and was kept throughout the MIP 
at a value around 25 % air saturation. Stirring rate levels are kept between 300 and 600 
rpm (expected from Figure 7.2), regulated by the DO cascade control. Once reached its 
maximum, pure O
2 was introduced by a gas mixer, along with air, keeping a range of 1-2 
vvm throughout the process.  
Apart from that, another alternative was put into practice to evaluate the effect of the 
oxygen tension. For reasons of availability of this bioreactor, this was needed to be carried 
out in a single experiment, so that an adapted version of the methodology that Dietzsch 
et al. (2011) [10] carried out was conducted. It consisted on a methanol pulsed feeding 
strategy (MPF). Three different values of DO were tested: 70, 25 and 50 % (air saturation), 
for reasons that will be thoroughly discussed in section 7.4.3. For each set point of DO 
(DO
SP), 2 sets of 3 pulses of approximately 5 g L-1 (L of culture) were introduced. In an 
overnight period between the two sets of pulses at DOSP 70 %, a methanol constant rate 
was settled not to leave the culture in starvation. A 90 % of the feeding rate for the in situ 
calculated 
qS,max was set as initial condition for this period in order not to cause methanol 
accumulation in the medium. Conditions of stirring and aeration were the same as the 
previous strategy. 
7.3.1.1 Applikon Biobundle 7L 
The lab scale fermentation meant to be transferred at pilot scale is taken directly from 
chapter 4. Thorough specifications of the equipment are already present there.  \n\n 
 
 161 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
7.3.1.2 Sartorius Biostat B 5 L. Inoculum cultures 
The first step of inoculation consisted on a 24 h growth in shake flasks containing complex 
media, YPD, which has, per liter, 10 g of yeast extract, 20 g of peptone, and 20 g of 
glucose. Zeocin was also introduced, at a concentration of 500 µg L
-1. The initial pH was 
7.4 and stirring speed, 150 rpm (HT Multitron Incubator, Infors AG, Bottmingen, 
Switzerland). The already grown culture was centrifuged at 4500 x g and the cells were 
re-suspended in bioreactor culture medium and used to inoculate a 5 L Sartorius Biostat 
B bioreactor (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany). Inoculums for the Biostat UD were grown in 
a 5 L Biostat B (Sartorius) fermenter. Initial volume was set at 2 L. Cells were inoculated in 
basal salts medium (BSM), with only 20 g of glycerol per liter, to meet the desirable final 
biomass concentration to inoculate in the larger fermenter. This process, then, consisted 
on a GBP, keeping DO at higher values than 25 % air saturation. pH was kept at 5.5 and 
temperature at 30ºC.  
7.3.2 Total protein 
Extracellular protein concentration was determined with the PierceTM Coomassie 
(Bradford) Protein Assay Kit (Prod. No. 23200, Rockford, IL, USA), according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Bovine serum albumin (BSA) was used as the protein 
standard for the calibration curve. Assays were taken in triplicate and the RSD was about 
5%. 
7.3.3 Biomass concentration 
Biomass concentration was determined by the dry cell weight (DCW) analysis, as 
described elsewhere in this dissertation. Assays were taken in triplicate and the RSD was 
about 5%. 
7.3.4 Substrate concentration determination and control 
For MNLFB strategy, methanol concentration was monitored by the Methanol Sensor 
System (Raven Biotech Inc., Vancouver, Canada) and controlled by performing a 
predictive-adaptive PI control strategy, as described previously.  \n\n 
 
 162 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Apart from that, it was also quantified offline by HPLC as previously reported [23]. RSD 
was estimated about 2 %. 
7.3.5 ROL activity assay 
Lipase activity was determined by performing an assay with the Roche Lipase Assay kit, 
as described previously. RSD was estimated to be about 5 %. 
7.3.6 SDS-PAGE 
Samples were run in sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–
PAGE) to analyze the secreted proteins, detect the product of interest and other proteins 
that could interfere. Gels were 12% polyacrylamide-composed, and were run in a Mini-
PROTEAN II apparatus using Mini-PROTEAN® TGX Stain-Free™ Protein Gels (Bio-Rad 
Laboratories Inc., Hercules, CA) following this procedure. At a 3:1 proportion, samples 
were mixed with sample buffer (90% v/v of 4x Laemmli Sample Buffer (Bio-Rad), 10% v/v 
of ß-Mercaptoethanol). The mix was incubated at 95 ºC during 5 min.  Precision Plus 
Protein
TM All Blue Prestained Protein Standards (Bio-Rad) was used as molecular weight 
(MW) marker. 5 µL of MW marker and 25 µL of sample mix were loaded to their 
corresponding well. Gel revelation was performed in Gel Doc EZ System (Bio-Rad) with a 
visible spectrum protocol and further analyzed using the software Image Lab 6.0 (Bio-
Rad). 
All samples analyzed were subjected, first, centrifugated 15 min at 7000 x g, at 4 ºC. This 
was followed by a 0.45 µm to end with an ultrafiltration and diafiltration at 10 kDa, to 
remove the great amount of salts in the medium that would difficult the analysis, and 
concentrate the proteins.  
7.3.7 Zymography 
Zymogram was carried out to determine which bands se parated by SDS-PAGE 
actually showed lipolytic activity.  
Firstly, proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE as it is described in section 7.3.6. Right 
after that, SDS was removed from the gel by incubation in a 2.5% Triton X-100 solution for \n\n 
 
 163 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
1 h at room temperature, to renaturalize the enzymes. The gel was washed then twice with 
a Tris-HCl 20 mM buffer solution at pH 7 for 15 min, and was finally incubated in a solution 
of MUF-butyrate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) 100 mM, using the same buffer as solvent. 
The gel was activated 30 s in UV and bands were detected by its fluorescence in Gel Doc 
EZ System (Bio-Rad), and further analyzed by the software Image Lab 6.0 (Bio-Rad).  
7.3.8 Western Blot 
Samples were first run in SDS–PAGE as it is explained in section 7.3.6. In this case, 
Precision Plus Protein™ Unstained and All Blue Protein Standards were used as molecular 
weight markers and 10 ng and 50 ng of a ROL standard solution (obtained from 
Bioingenium, SL, Barcelona, Spain) were loaded in two wells. Gel visualization was 
performed after UV activation using the Gel Doc EZ System. To carry out Western blots 
after SDS-PAGE, proteins were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (10 min, 2.5A, 
25V) using the Trans-Blot® Turbo™ Transfer System. The membrane was blocked during 1 
h incubation in 5% skim milk in washing buffer (1% v/v of Tween 20) and then incubated 
with a 1:10000 mouse anti-ROL antiserum (obtained from the Servei de Cultius Cel·lulars, 
Producció d’Anticossos i Citometria, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, 
Spain) for 1h. After washing, the membrane was incubated with 1:1000 HRP-conjugated 
polyclonal anti-mouse IgG (Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, MO, US) as a secondary antibody 
during 1h. Detection was carried out by incubating the membrane for 5 minutes with 
Clarity™ Western ECL Substrate. Further image analysis and quantification was performed 
with Molecular Imager® ChemiDoc™ XRS System and the software Image Lab 6.0 (Bio-
Rad).  
7.3.9 Free RNA concentration 
The concentration of RNA was determined by using a NanoDrop 1000 
Spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). 2µL of water were loaded to 
blank it. 2µL of sample were loaded and the software calculated the absorbance 
corresponding to the concentration of RNA present in the sample. \n\n 
 
 164 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
7.3.10 Theory and calculations 
Procedures to calculate yields (Y*X/S, Y*P/X), discrete and mean specific rates (µ, qS, qP, qO2, 
qCO2 ) elemental balances and performance indexes (volumetric productivity, QP; specific 
productivity, QPs) are specified elsewhere (chapters 4 and 5).   
7.4 Results and discussion 
7.4.1  Change of scale of a MNLFB strategy 
The transference of Pichia pastoris cultures up to larger scales has already been brought 
off during the last decades, as scarce examples from the literature illustrate. However, 
there is no source of work carried out in terms of producing ROL. Recently and focusing 
on the production of this lipase, some non-published data obtained by Surribas (2007) [11] 
and Arnau (2011) [12]. 
As stated in chapter 4 and published in [13], the best methanol concentration set point 
(S
SP) to be followed during the MIP is 3 g L-1 in a MNLFB strategy using the present Pichia 
pastoris strain, in terms of achieving the optimum specific production rate (qP). Due to this 
fact, it has been the most widely applied operational strategy among the research 
surrounding ROL
 production in P. pastoris under PAOX1  control, also present in this 
dissertation and in published articles [8]. Therefore, this alternative was selected for the 
scale upgrading to a 50 L bioreactor. 
The performance of the main state variables, i.e, X, S and P is collected and graphically 
represented in Figure 7.3 along the analog data from the 25% DO experiment taken from 
chapter 3 of this thesis.   
As it is appreciated in Figure 7.3, the induction time was selected as independent variable 
for better understanding of the differences between the two scales, in terms of durability 
and divergences between the evolution of 
X, S and P. An overview of the results it offers 
a clear evidence that profiles of X and P at a pilot scale did not follow the performance of 
their analogues at lab scale. Despite the S values being close to each other (reminding S 
was a condition imposed to the system and, therefore, controlled all along MIP), X and P 
resulted unexpectedly downgraded, concretely, with final values (for the same induction \n\n 
 
 165 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
time) of X 1.3-fold lower at pilot scale, while the factor is enwidened up to 6.5 when final 
activity is referred.   
 
 
Figure 7.3.  Induction time profiles of the performance of pilot plant (50 L) fermentation alongside 
lab scale (5 L) process. Pilot scale biomass concentration (X, ●), methanol concentration (S, ) and 
ROL activity (P, ▲). Lab scale X (○), S (□) and P (∆). Lines (pilot scale, ______; lab scale, ___  ___) are 
spline interpolations of the offline data shown.   
This behavior, in consequence, foresees a descent of specific rates. Their mean values 
for both scales were calculated and further included in  
Table 7.1 Comparison of physiologic parameters and main performance indexes of both scale 
MNLFB strategies, alongside with volumetric productivity, the key performance index that 
was meant to be achieved in this change of scale.   
Firstly, even though yield of biomass-substrate (
Y*X/S) is approximately a 15 % lower in pilot 
scale process, it is not considered as a significant divergence, since estimation of the 
volume in Biostat UD is not as straightforward as in the lab scale, which can lead to some 
error (5 %). Moreover, 
Y*X/S is reported to fit in a range of 0.11 – 0.30 for recombinant P. 
pastoris cultures growing on methanol as a sole carbon source [14–16,8,17,18]. This similar 
yield indicates that both µ and qS were downgraded at approximately the same factor, 
which corresponded to a value around 2.2-2.6, as it is shown in  
Table 7.1.  
 
Induction time (h)
-40 -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30 40
X (g L-1)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
S (g L-1)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
P (U  mL-1)
0
100
200
300
400
GBP + TP MIP\n\n 
 
 166 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Table 7.1 Comparison of physiologic parameters and main performance indexes of both scale 
MNLFB strategies 
 
Additionally, taking into consideration that no byproducts were detected by HPLC analysis 
and this non-dramatic divergence that existed between Y*X/S from both experiments, 
qO2,mean  was estimated by assuming the accomplishment of the degree of reduction 
balance (or electron balance, EB) and the elemental carbon balance (CB). The need to 
perform this estimation is due to the lack of O
2 and CO2 off-gas analyzers in the pilot plant 
set-up. So, this value was expected to be lower in large scale. Indeed, it is reflected in  
Table 7.1 that pilot scale qO2,mean  was the 56% of the lab scale one, both obtained by 
performing the same operational strategy. The difference in the maximal OTR is even 
wider, due to fact that in bench-top scale, higher biomass concentration was achieved (59 
g L-1 in respect to 38 g L-1).  
Apart from that, and as Figure 7.3 showed ahead, qP was severely reduced (more than 5 
times), having a direct impact on Y*P/X, producing about the half of activity units (U) per 
gram of cells in pilot scale using the same feeding strategy in respect to the lab scale.  
Everything that has been just stated contributed to diminish significantly the productivity 
of ROL, stablishing itself in an inferior order of magnitude in pilot scale (see  
Operational 
strategy 
Units Pilot scale Lab scale 
µmean  h -1 0.013 ± 0.002 0.034 ± 0.001 
qS,mean  g g-1 h -1 0.083 ± 0.005 0.181 ± 0.016 
qP,mean  U g-1 h -1 48 ± 6 256  ± 22  
Y*X/S g g-1 0.16 0.19 
Y*P/X U g-1 3275  7529 
Estimated qO2,mean  mmol g-1 h -1 4.13 7.35 
OTRmax  mmol L-1 h -1 157 430  
ROL titer U mL-1 59.8 368 
Volumetric 
productivity 
U L-1 h-1 585 5490 \n\n 
 
 167 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Table 7.1). Therefore, and especially because of this last statement, the change of scale 
carried out by this experimental was proven unsuccessful.  
Nevertheless, this unfortunate situation does not lack of precedents, since Surribas 
(2008) [11] and Arnau (2011) [12] already experimented a decrease on the productivity of 
ROL. In the first case, concretely, the pilot scale process had been 5 times less productive, 
and mean specific rates turned out to be at similar levels as the present case. The 
information on this matter will be extended in section 7.4.3. However, it was expected to 
finally improve the performance of the change of scale by a strict control of 
S at 3 g L-1 
and the reproduction of oxygen transfer conditions, as stated before, by working at a 
constant dissolved oxygen (25% air saturation). A comparison with results from Arnau 
(2011) [12] is not as straightforward, though, because the feeding strategies applied 
consisted on mixed substrates along methanol (glycerol, sorbitol), due to the use of a Mut
s 
(repression of PAOX1 ) strain to express ROL. Despite this fact, this trend of the productivity 
and mean specific rates of the main state variables of the process was also observed in 
that work. Apart from that, and regardless of the improvements that were achieved there 
concerning the methanol feeding physical particularities, the requirements of the main 
performance indexes (P
F, QP and Y*P/X) were not accomplished, for two experiments with 
different µSP during the induction phase.  
7.4.2 Hypothesis I. Operational and process variable limitations 
Once reaching this point, one should ask themselves, with the advances in the control of 
S, N-source and DO (chapter 2) in respect to previous attempts, what is actually holding 
back the scalability of the process to a mere 10-fold factor of volume? Moreover, this task 
has already been accomplished downwards (chapter 5).  
So, it has been hypothesized that the bottleneck needed to be located in some 
operational limitation from the Biostat UD itself. While pH was discarded, since Arnau 
(2011) [12] already performed a study of the mixing inside the Biostat UD and demonstrated 
there were not concentration gradients of methanol alongside the height of the vessel, 
fact that can be extrapolated to other solutes present in the medium. However, oxygen 
transfer is another matter of concern. First of all, excluding 
Y*P/X, Y*X/S was approximately 
maintained after the change of scale, while µ and qS were parallelly reduced. This \n\n 
 
 168 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
downgrading was analogously observed in chapter 4 [8], at those cultures subdued to low 
oxygen tension. Second, despite kLa had been appointed to be superior at Biostat UD 
(section 7.3.1), the previous statement provides the possibility that gradients of dissolved 
oxygen may exist alongside the height of the bioreactor. Due to the physical impossibility 
to measure DO at different points of the system, an alternative experiment was proposed, 
consisting on a batch with methanol pulses strategy.  
7.4.3 Outcoming oxygen tension limitations. A physiologic characterization in 
pilot plant by a methanol pulsed feeding strategy (MPF) 
As stated previously, an alternative study in pilot scale was needed to be 
performed to try to outcome the obstacles found during the change of scale 
described in the section 7.4.1. 
Concretely, to avoid multiple experiments and due to the limited availability of the 
pilot plant, a single experiment was designed, and it has been thoroughly detailed 
at section 7.3.1. However, it enabled to obtain plenty of information, regarding 
physiologic data out of specific rates of growth, methanol consumption and ROL 
activity production for DO set points of 25, 50 and 70 % air saturation during the 
MIP. Due to the non-availability of the Methanol Sensor System (Raven Biotech), 
the pulsed methanol strategy (MPF) was designed and applied. So, the mean 
values of these rates needed to be determined, now more than before, since 
methanol concentration is not constant along the different pulses, and they are 
detailed in Figure 7.4. \n\n 
 
 169 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 7.4 Mean specific rates of growth (µ), methanol uptake (qS) and ROL activity production (qP) 
for each condition of oxygen tension for MPF strategy. On top, dependencies of qS and qP on µ.  
To begin with, regarding the effect of the DO, there is a dependence on it pointed to the 
same direction of both µ and qS. Even though this fact matches with the work exposed in 
chapter 3 [8] in terms of the limitation of the bioprocess efficiency by the levels of DO, it 
clearly disagree with it in, first, the absolute values of both µ and qS, significantly lower in 
the present case, and second, in the position of the maximum of both specific rates, 
corresponding with the maximum DO
SP (70%) in MPF, while in the case of lab scale MNLFB 
culture, those maximums were present at DOSP of 25%, and also all specific rates were 
inhibited at the top range of DO (50%). Whereas these affirmations may seem to constitute 
gross divergences from the previous work discussed, it is necessary to point out that MPF 
and MNLFB diverge significantly between their 
S profiles, a situation that surely 
contributes on those differences. In fact, as stated in chapter 4, Lee and his coworkers 
(2003) [19] improved the specific growth of 
P. pastoris under methanol growth rate at 
higher DO (30-50% air saturation), while only a slight decrease in productivity was 
observed by Jazini et al. (2014) [15] when subduing the culture at a condition of 70% of 
DO. Apart from that, the next matter of concern is the low absolute values of µ, qS and qP 
that are still being obtained in contrast with the same expression system in the lab scale. 
In that sense,  
\n\n 
 
 170 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Figure 7.5 has been built to illustrate this situation, where these physiologic parameters 
from MPF strategy, along with a previous approach of change of scale [11] are confronted 
to two kinetic models from previous published work [8,20,21] about ROL production by 
the same P. pastoris strain. 
 
Figure 7.5 . Experimental data of mean specific rates from pilot plant and lab scale fermentations 
confronted to modelling data. Points obtained in this work: qS,mean  (●), qP,mean (♦). Non-published 
data from pilot plant cultivations by Surribas (2008) [11]: qS,mean (●), qP,mean (♦). Published data from 
c
hapter 4 [8]: qS,mean  (□) , qP,mean (∆). Experimental data from [13]: qS,mean MLFB (x),  qP,mean MLFB (▼), 
qS,mean MNLFB (x),  qP,mean MNLFB (▼). Modelling profiles in respect to µ: qS from [8] (____), qP from [8] 
(___ ___), qS from [21] (____), qP from [21] (MLFB ___ ___, MNLFB ___ ___ ). 
In  
Figure 7.5,  the points obtained at pilot scale are circled for their easier location.  From 
this information , those conditions are stated to be closer to those values that correspond 
to either MLFB strategies [20] or rather MNLFB ones with scarce dissolved oxygen [8]. 
Moreover, previous non-published results of a change of scale by Surribas (2008) [11] 
agree quite well with the present study, by fitting in the behavior. The results obtained in 
the present work, also, agree with the previous non-published data from Surribas (2008), 
µ (h-1)
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
qS (g g-1 h-1)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
qP (U g-1 h-1)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
MNLFB lab scale model regulated by DO [8] 
MLFB lab scale model regulated by S feeding (µS P) [21]  
MNLFB lab scale model regulated by S feeding (SS P) [21] 
 qS 
qP \n\n 
 
 171 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
by fitting in the trend indicated by the three points of qS and qP. The fact that those red 
points are located between the first and second black points of each rate is completely 
plausible, since Surribas worked at DO levels between 25 and 50 %, precisely coinciding 
with values that correspond to the operational conditions of these two commented black 
points. The reason of a higher 
qS value may be due to the fact that methanol consumption 
may be overestimated, since this substrate was, at that time, introduced from the top plate 
of the reactor, and part of it was stripped to the off-gas. In Table 7.2, this information is 
broadened, by including, as well, the values of the main performance indexes of industrial 
interest.   
It is simply appreciated in Table 7.2 that bioprocess efficiency of all attempts of bringing 
this process up to a higher scale did not reach the desired levels. Concretely, the highest 
Q
P, which is not even achieved by a MNLFB strategy, is not even the half of the one from 
strategy that was intended to be reproduced. Instead, QP pilot scale values are much 
closer to less productive strategies, as MLFB or MNLFB ones which are more distant to 
the optimal 
S levels, as exemplified in the table. It is necessary to be included in this 
discussion, though, that the fact of working at higher DOSP has helped to improve this 
performance indexes in respect to the strategy discussed in section 7.4.1. However, they 
can be hardly compared, since MPF gets the aim of this work away from the path of 
bringing up the MNLFB alternative up to a higher scale. On the other hand, Y*
P/X and 
specific productivity behaved, as well, as anticipated, since qP resulted lower in all cases 
than the initial expectations, as it has been already stated.  
Apart from that, returning to  
Figure 7.5, it is easy to graphically notice that if this series of data was modelled, 
significantly higher maintenance coefficients (m S, m P) would be obtained if they were 
compared to the two models represented in the figure, indicating major discordance in 
physiology between both scales.  
Hence, reaching this point, it is clear that a lot of uncertainty stands in the path of 
achieving the goals proposed, constituting a hurdle in the way of bringing this process up 
to the industrial scale, task that a priori did not seem so troublesome, despite the 
precedents. \n\n 
 
 172 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 \n\n 
 
 173 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish 
Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Table 7.2  C omparison of bioprocess efficiency among different fed-batch operational strategies performed at pilot scale (50 L) and lab scale (5 L). ± indicates 
standard error (SE). Productivities and yields are calculated over all fermentation time. 
Feeding strategy  MPF  
(present work) 
MNLFB  
SSP = 3 g L-1 
(present work) 
MNLFB  
SSP = 3 g L-1 
[11] 
MNLFB  
SSP = 3 g L-1 
DO SP = 25 % 
[
8] 
MNLFB  
SSP = 2 g L-1 
[13] 
MLFB  
µSP = 0.02 h-1 
[13] 
Scale - P ilot Pilot Pilot Lab Lab Lab 
Variable of study - 
D
O 
Change of 
scale 
Change of 
scale 
Change of 
scale DO S-µ modelling S-µ modelling 
ROL titer U  mL-1 158 59.8 86 368 103 112 
Y
*P/X U g-1 4172 1253 - 7700 2004 2644 
Volumetric 
productivity
 U L-1 h -1 2323 585 1329 5490 2437 1857 
Specific 
productivity U g-1 h-1 60 15 - 93 48 36 
µ
mean  h -1 0.018 0.013±0.002 0.015 0.034±0.001 0.043±0.002 0.014±0.001 
q
S,mean
 g g-1 h-1 0.091 0.083±0.005 0.125 0.181±0.016 0.19±0.01 0.07±0.01 
q
P,mean
 U g-1 h-1 115 48±6 90 256±22 106±9 46±4 \n\n 
 
 174 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
7.4.4 Hypothesis II. Physiologic discordances, the own paths of growth/substrate 
consumption and product secretion 
Settling down and gathering all data obtained so far together, it is manifest the right way 
to follow from this point and on is split into two differentiated paths.  
The first one, consists in figuring out why growth and methanol consumption are parallelly 
so downgraded when subduing the cells at S and oxygen availability that are very 
favorable, as previous reported results show in lab scale. The hypothesis currently being 
weighed relies on some avoided operational feature that has been skipped until now. 
With the methanol stripping problem solved and the demonstration of the inexistence of 
mixing limitations [12], on one hand, and the hint of possible O
2 gradients within the liquid 
phase by the displacement of the dependence of specific rates on DO, on the other one; 
scarce alternative flaws, so, are to be detected. A possibility still had to be considered, 
though, which is the higher cutting force that mechanic stirring provides at higher scales 
could cause harm to the cells, and that would be reflected in lower growth rate, and in 
consequence, consumption and production rates. To get an approach to this 
circumstance, posterior free RNA analysis in the supernatant were tested in some of MPF 
strategy samples. In Figure 7.6 the induction time evolution of this variable is represented. 
Higher levels of free RNA in the medium would inquire cell lysis and would reinforce the 
contemplated hypothesis. However, with the available data from Figure 7.6 either option 
Figure 7.6.  Induction time evolution of free RNA in the supernatant, both absolut (red) and specific (blue). \n\n 
 
 175 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
cannot be stated categorically. While it is true that the amount of RNA per gram of cell 
increased along the process, there were two phases where the levels remained practically 
invariable, and where arbitrarily at the beginning and the end of the MIP, at two different 
DO
SP conditions. To confront the validity of this data, another analogue culture should be 
carried out at lab scale to compare the levels of specific free RNA. Apart from that, future 
cultures in pilot scale should also be subjected to further analysis that give more 
information about the state of the cells, i.e., viability, oxidative stress in terms of reactive 
oxidative species (ROS) or cell cycle state.  
On a different matter, product kinetics have shown no dependence at all on DO levels 
and, in consequence, on 
µ itself. As it has been stated, this contradicts what has been 
obtained in lab scale in previous works. So, to slightly clear part of the uncertainty that 
surrounds this unexpected low and invariable production rate behavior, a study of the 
protein quality was proposed, testing the two different strategies applied in pilot scale, 
while comparing them with alternatives already tested in lab scale. 
7.4.5 Easing the path of product formation limitations. Extracellular protein 
analysis 
Following the way proposed in the previous section, a detailed study around the secreted 
proteins was carried out in order to shed light to the intriguing behavior of the product 
kinetics in pilot scale. It included a SDS-PAGE to identify whole set of proteins that 
conforms the secretome and their molecular weight (MW), a zymogram with MUF-butyrate 
to determine which of those proteins show lipasic activity and, finally, a Western Blot, ROL-
specific, to identify the protein of interest and also to roughly calculate ROL concentration 
in each sample. This last value will be of utterly importance, since it will enable to obtain 
the specific activity referred to ROL, which permits to compare how active was ROL 
produced in each strategy. The strategies selected were MFP and MNLFB at pilot scale 
and the two optimal 
S profile from chapter 4 (OP1 and OP2) for the lab scale cases. These 
two latter were chosen for publishing needs and because they should not behave 
differently from MNLFB 3 g L
-1, included in the discussion of the present chapter, due to 
their similar bioprocess efficiency. \n\n 
 
 176 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
Figure 7.7 ( A). SDS-PAGE. Lanes 1 and 6, Precision Plus Protein™ All Blue Prestained Protein 
Standards (Bio-Rad) molecular weight (MW) markers. Lanes 2-5, pilot plant scale bioreactor 
samples, 2 and 3 from MPF strategy (replicates), 4 and 5 MNLFB 3 g L-1. Lanes 7-10 Lab scale 
bioreactor samples, 7 and 8 from OP1, 9 and 10 OP2. (B). Zymogram. Lane distribution is the same 
as (A). 
First of all, ROL was successfully identified, as expected, in all samples, as a thick band of 
28.1 kDa, which matches the reported recombinant ROL (rROL) also obtained by P. 
pastoris in a previous characterization of the protein by Guillén et al. (2011) [22]. These 
bands are also detected by zymography, appointing its enzymatic activity, and by Western 
Blot analysis ( 
Figure 7.7 and Figure 7.8).  
SDS-PAGE, in first terms, provided specially interesting information, regardless of the 
objectives that were pursued through its fulfillment. Concretely, and most evident, it 
showed the direct influence of the operational strategy on the secretome of the cell. If 
lanes 2 and 3 are confronted to the rest of the samples (MPF in respect to MNLFB), one 
can state that, apart from ROL, the remainder protein profile is significantly different. 
Concretely, the presence, in MNLFB strategies, of Protein 1 (pilot) and Protein 2 (lab scale), 
both presenting around the double MW than ROL, is the most significant one. It probably 
consists on the same protein, but Protein 1, specifically, was also detected by zymogram, 
indicating that probably part of the activity that was detected in the supernatant derived 
from that specific molecule. That also brought up the possibility that, under MNLFB 
conditions in pilot scale, part of the ROL produced was being derived to form a dimer, 
B 
A  
 B \n\n 
 
 177 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
since Protein 1, as stated, doubles ROL in MW. That could explain, at least partially, the 
diminution of the activity on that particular culture, since despite detecting a thick band of 
Protein 1 in SDS-PAGE, its detection in the zymogram was rather weaker than ROL, 
indicating that this protein would be less specifically active. The Western Blot performed 
afterwards was also intended to clarify this aspect of the results.  
Nevertheless, to sum up, what can be clearly drawn from these previous results is the 
direct influence of the strategy on, not only the levels of recombinant protein, but other 
proteins to be secreted, obtaining different profiles of them if MPF and MNLFB are 
compared to each other. The set of secreted proteins from MNLFB pilot fermentation 
indicates also that, for some reason that cannot be currently appointed, proteins of high 
MW are more present than in lab scale, and concretely, an MUF-butyrate-sensible protein 
apart from ROL. 
Figure 7.8 includes the two Western Blot, one for each scale, that the samples from  
Figure 
7.7 were subjected to.  
Figure 7.8 Western Blot analysis. (A) Pilot plant fermentations. Lanes 1-3, dilution bank of a sample 
of MPF strategy. Lanes 4-6, dilution bank of MNLFB 3 g L-1 strategy.  Lane 7, superposed visible 
MW marker. Lane 8, purified ROL standard (10 ng). Lane 9, purified ROL standard (50 ng). (B) Lab 
scale bioreactor fermentations. Lanes 1-3, sample MNLFB strategy (OP1) dilution bank. Lanes 4-6, 
sample of MNLFB strategy (OP2) dilution bank. Lane 7, superposed visible MW marker. Lane 8, 
purified ROL standard (50 ng). Each dilution bank contains, in order, samples 1x, 0.5x and 0.2x.  
At this point, and from what it is explicitly observed in Figure 7.8, ROL was successfully 
identified in all samples. However, Protein 1 was not detected, suggesting it may not 
consist on a ROL dimer. Last years, studies on the secretome of P. pastoris have been 
A  B \n\n 
 
 178 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
published, within which Mattanovich et al. (2009) [23] and Huang et al. (2011) [24] can be 
highlighted. While the first one identified the secreted proteins from P. pastoris growing 
under glucose, Huang et al. carried out a similar study but using methanol as sole carbon 
source and cultivating a X-33 strain producing a vaccine, in fed-batch mode, controlling 
methanol concentration at 1 g L-1, which is more interesting for matching the case of study. 
The results they showed included a number of proteins around MW of Protein 1 (and 2), 
some of them hypothetical or unidentified, that could correspond to it, but none explicitly 
provided lipase catalytic activity. Regarding Protein 3, there were some examples of 
proteins that were secreted significantly with similar MW, like one that is homologue with 
EXG1, involved in cell wall beta-glucan formation (47.8 kDa, pI 4.53).  
Finally, in Table 7.3, concentrations of protein in the samples used, and more importantly, 
specific activity referred to ROL in each strategy, are specified. 
Table 7.3 C onditions of protein load for all protein analysis. Results of specific activity in respect 
to ROL by quantification from Western Blot (WB) and ROL fraction in the protein extract. ± indicates 
SD of triplicates of total protein analysis. In specific activity and ROL fraction, it corresponds to the 
propagated error from both activity assay and the quantification of ROL concentration. 
 
Table 7.3 evidences an order of magnitude between the load of proteins between SDS-
PAGE and WB due to the difference of sensitivities of the two analyses. WB samples were 
prepared to show the same initial activity to fit in the detection limits, which corresponds 
to an initial sample of around 20 U mL
-1 and their dilutions according Figure 7.8.  
  
MNLFB  
(This work) 
MPF  
(This work) 
OP1 
(Chap. 4 ) 
OP2  
(Chap. 4) 
Scale - Pilot Pilot Lab Lab 
Total protein 
(SDS-PAGE /Zymogram ) 
m
gprot L-1 285 ± 7 245 ± 4 212 ± 34 268 ± 14 
Total protein 
(Western Blot) 
mg prot L-1 43.1 ± 6.3 19.8 ± 3.3 23.8 ± 7.4 13.9 ± 5.1 
Specific activity U  ng-1ROL 6.99 ± 0.47 7.79 ± 0.34 5.18 ± 0.07 7.41 ± 0.23 
ROL fraction mg ROL mgprot-1 0.06 ± 0.01 0.13 ± 0.02 0.23 ± 0.07 0.24 ± 0.09 \n\n 
 
 179 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Results on specific activity do not evidence major enough differences between strategies 
that could justify or demonstrate a similar production of ROL in absolute quantity or 
concentration but less active in pilot scale processes. Therefore, this hypothesis is 
discarded. Besides, even though similar strategies like OP1 and OP2 evidence a 
divergence around the 30% of specific activity, Western Blot cannot be considered as an 
absolutely accurate method to quantify the amount of ROL in a sample, but indeed can 
be for detecting major differences, which was the aim suggested for this section. 
Differences on the ROL purity within scales are evident. OP1 and OP2 more than doubled 
ROL fraction in the secretome, in respect to pilot plant fermentations. This was hinted 
qualitatively in SDS-PAGE ( 
Figure 
7.7). This observation leads to state that the protein production may be directed to 
other endogenous ones, for some reason that cannot currently be attributed to.  
7.4.6 Hypothesis III. Future beyond 
With this situation straight ahead, the next step in this matter should be deepening into 
the cause of the huge divergences existing between both scales. Having exposed the 
main hypothesis and now discarded, the remaining alternatives are summed up: 
- Looking up to cell viability and oxidative stress, as a way to detect some 
unexpected physiological behavior or damage. Monitoring free RNA is also an 
easy, fast way to detect unexpected genetic material release to the 
supernatant. However, it must be compared to a standard lab scale 
fermentation, to value which are the normal concentration levels. Despite 
having these consequences hypothetically confirmed, the causes would not 
be appointed. 
- Working at lower stirring rates, which would reduce the shear stress, in order 
to study its influence on the bioprocess efficiency of the process. It must be 
noticed, though, that this change will also diminish k
La, so that larger pure O2 
flow rates will be needed to maintain the desired levels of OTR. A monitoring 
of the oxidative stress will also be mandatory to evaluate the possible negative 
effects of this consequence.  \n\n 
 
 180 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
- Deepening into oxygen tension limitations. The mismatch of the culture 
physiology dependence on that condition between both scales still leads to 
consider the existence of gradients within the height of the reactor. A way to 
measure DO from the top of the vessel and height-regulable would be the 
most desired alternative to outcome the obstacles on this matter.  
- Even though Protein 1 was not detected in WB, techniques on trying to 
dissociate a hypothetic dimer of ROL (e.g. Triton-X-100 treatment [25]) could 
be put into practice to fully discard this possibility. 
7.5 C onclusions 
There is no mistake on asserting that, unfortunately, with these new results now 
extensively discussed, there is still a long path straight ahead to accomplish the change 
of scale of ROL production by P. pastoris. Still, a thorough work has been carried out to 
uncover and outcome the main physiological limitations and operational, in a bioprocess 
engineering point of view, and plausible causes of the downgrading of the kinetics have 
been discarded.  
However, a new spectrum of alternatives is now opened to carry on with this path. 
Bioprocess scaling up is particularly essential to be accomplished regarding the present 
case of study, as ROL is a potential product of industrial interest and its production has 
been studied and improved all along the last years, by previous works and specially 
during the PhD period where this dissertation finds its sense. That has been materialized 
in the optimization of simple operational strategies that enabled to reach the top levels of 
bioprocess efficiency (volumetric productivity, ROL final titers) that are potentially 
transferable to the industry scale, and settled a platform to be applied to straightforwardly 
design and develop new bioprocesses of production of heterologous protein production. 
  \n\n 
 
 181 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
7.6 References 
[1] C. Solà, F. Gòdia, Scale Up, in: J.A. Asenjo, J.C. Merchuk (Eds.), Bioreact. Syst. Des., 
Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, 1994: pp. 511–522. 
[2] North East Biomanufacturing Center & Collaborative, (n.d.). 
http://www.biomanufacturing.org/ (accessed July 12, 2017). 
[3] J.-D. Yang, C. Lu, B. Stasny, J. Henley, W. Guinto, C. Gonzalez, J. Gleason, M. Fung, 
B. Collopy, M. Benjamino, J. Gangi, M. Hanson, E. Ille, Fed-Batch Bioreactor Process 
Scale-Up From 3-L to 2,500-L Scale For Monoclonal Antibody Production From Cell 
Culture, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 98 (2007) 141–154. 
[4] D. Martínez, C. Menéndez, L. Hernández, A. Sobrino, L.E. Trujillo, I. Rodríguez, E.R. 
Pérez, Scaling-up batch conditions for efficient sucrose hydrolysis catalyzed by an 
immobilized recombinant Pichia pastoris cells in a stirrer tank reactor, Electron. J. 
Biotechnol. 25 (2017) 39–42. 
[5] P. Vaz de Arruda, J. César dos Santos, R. De Cássia Lacerda Brambilla Rodrigues, 
D.D. Virgínio da Silva, C.K. Yamakawa, G. Jackson de Moraes Rocha, J.N. Júnior, 
J.G. da Cruz Pradella, C.E. Vaz Rossell, M. das G. de Almeida Felipe, Scale up of 
xylitol production from sugarcane bagasse hemicellulosic hydrolysate by Candida 
guilliermondii FTI 20037, J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 47 (2016) 297–302. 
[6] H.B. Reisman, Problems in scale-up of biotechnology production processes, Crit. 
Rev. Biotechnol. 13 (1993) 195–253. 
[7] F. Garcia-Ochoa, E. Gomez, Bioreactor scale-up and oxygen transfer rate in 
microbial processes: An overview, Biotechnol. Adv. 27 (2009) 153–176. 
[8] X. Ponte, J.L. Montesinos-Seguí, F. Valero, Bioprocess efficiency in 
Rhizopus 
oryzae lipase production by Pichia pastoris under the control of PAOX1  is oxygen 
tension dependent, Process Biochem. 51 (2016) 1954–1963. 
[9] J.M. Barrigón de San Marcos, Model-based design and implementation of 
operational strategies for Rhizopus oryzae lipase production in Pichia pastoris 
under the AOX1  promoter, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 2015. \n\n 
 
 182 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
[10] C. Dietzsch, O. Spadiut, C. Herwig, A dynamic method based on the specific 
substrate uptake rate to set up a feeding strategy for Pichia pastoris, Microb. Cell 
Fact. 10 (2011) 14. 
[11] A. Surribas Casalprim, Millora en el procés de producció d’una lipasa de Rhizopus 
oryzae en Pichia pastoris mitjançant tècniques de monitoratge i estratègies de 
cultiu alternatives, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 2008. 
[12] C. Arnau Jimenez, Estratègies d’operació per a la producció de lipases de 
Rhizopus oryzae amb el fenotip Muts de Pichia pastoris mitjançant substrats mixtes, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 2011. 
[13] J.M. Barrigón, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, Searching the best operational strategies 
for Rhizopus oryzae lipase production in Pichia pastoris Mut+ phenotype: Methanol 
limited or methanol non-limited fed-batch cultures?, Biochem. Eng. J. 75 (2013) 47–
54. 
[14] J.M. Barrigon, R. Ramon, I. Rocha, F. Valero, E.C. Ferreira, J.L. Montesinos, State 
and Specific Growth Estimation in Heterologous Protein Production by Pichia 
pastoris, AIChe J. 58 (2012) 2966–2979. 
[15] M. Jazini, G. Cekici, C. Herwig, Quantifying the Effects of Frequency and Amplitude 
of Periodic Oxygen-Related Stress on Recombinant Protein Production in Pichia 
pastoris, Bioengineering. 1 (2014) 47–61.  
[16] J. Xie, R. Yang, Q. Zhou, P. Du, R. Gan, Q. Ye, Efficiencies of Growth and Angiostatin 
Expression in Cultures of Pichia pastoris Fed with Mixed Carbon Sources, Chem. 
Biochem. Eng. Q. 27 (2013) 235–244. 
[17] N.K. Khatri, F. Hoffmann, Impact of methanol concentration on secreted protein 
production in oxygen-limited cultures of recombinant Pichia pastoris, Biotechnol. 
Bioeng. 93 (2006) 871–9. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16320364 
(accessed November 17, 2015). 
[18] S. Curvers, P. Brixius, T. Klauser, J. Th??mmes, D. Weuster-Botz, R. Takors, C. 
Wandrey, Human chymotrypsinogen B production with 
Pichia pastoris by 
integrated development of fermentation and downstream processing. Part 1. \n\n 
 
 183 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
Fermentation, Biotechnol. Prog. 17 (2001) 495–502. 
[19] C.Y. Lee, S.J. Lee, K.H. Jung, S. Katoh, E.K. Lee, High dissolved oxygen tension 
enhances heterologous protein expression by recombinant Pichia pastoris, 
Process Biochem. 38 (2003) 1147–1154. 
[20] J.M. Barrigón, J.L. Montesinos, F. Valero, Searching the best operational strategies 
for Rhizopus oryzae lipase production in Pichia pastoris Mut+ phenotype: Methanol 
limited or methanol non-limited fed-batch cultures?, Biochem. Eng. J. 75 (2013) 47–
54. 
[21] J.M. Barrigon, F. Valero, J.L. Montesinos, A macrokinetic model-based comparative 
meta-analysis of recombinant protein production by Pichia pastoris under AOX1  
promoter, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 112 (2015) 1132–1145. 
[22] M. Guillén, M.D. Benaiges, F. Valero, Comparison of the biochemical properties of 
a recombinant lipase extract from Rhizopus oryzae expressed in Pichia pastoris 
with a native extract, Biochem. Eng. J. 54 (2011) 117–123. 
[23] D. Mattanovich, A. Graf, J. Stadlmann, M. Dragosits, A. Redl, M. Maurer, M. 
Kleinheinz, M. Sauer, F. Altmann, B. Gasser, Genome, secretome and glucose 
transport highlight unique features of the protein production host Pichia pastoris., 
Microb. Cell Fact. 8 (2009) 29. 
[24] C.J. Huang, L.M. Damasceno, K.A. Anderson, S. Zhang, L.J. Old, C.A. Batt, A 
proteomic analysis of the Pichia pastoris secretome in methanol-induced cultures, 
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 90 (2011) 235–247. 
[25] N.C. Robinson, L. Talbert, Triton X-100 induced dissociation of beef heart 
cytochrome c oxidase into monomers, Biochemistry. 25 (1986) 2328–2335. 
 
 
 
 \n\n 
 
 184 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 
  \n\n 
 
 185 
 
7. Pilot plant Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
 \n\n 
 
 1
85 
 
8. General conclusions Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
8 G ENERAL CONCLUSIONS 
In a global view, this PhD dissertation has explored and studied the bioprocess of production of Rhizopus oryzae 
lipase by Pichia pastoris in a bioprocess engineering point view, looking forward to a feasible industrial process.  
In the first place, the focus was placed on the implementation of a new environment of peripherals and the 
improvement of monitoring and supervision of the system. An automatic feeding strategy for the nitrogen source was 
developed to favor process reproducibility and avoid limitations that fluctuations of it cause to the ROL production.  
On the other hand, a systematic study of the influence of dissolved oxygen on this process was also carried out. A 
significant effect on the physiology of the cells of the level of oxygen availability was stablished, under normoxic 
conditions, where an optimal DO of 25 % air saturation during the methanol induction was found.  
In the same way, it was also demonstrated that downgrading or rising the value of DO had no significant effect on the 
yields in respect to substrate or biomass, leading to conclude that DO has not visible influence on the metabolism of 
methanol uptake in normoxia. 
Finally, these results also pointed out the need to characterize the DO effect not only in the present bioprocess, but 
for the production of other recombinant proteins or even different expression systems, and so, the need of a fine 
control of this variable, to avoid compromising the bioprocess efficiency by either a lack or an excess of oxygen 
tension.  
Moreover, a successful step forward to optimization of the bioprocess exploited in this thesis was achieved. From 
modelling data, and mathematical tools of optimization, a simple platform was developed and employed to design 
new feeding strategies of methanol based on the optimal profiles of this substrate concentration.  
Two new alternatives, maximizing product titer and volumetric productivity, respectively, were simulated and 
successfully validated experimentally, achieving better efficiency when compared to previous MLFB and MNLFB 
alternatives.  
Apart, and not less important, the work carried out in this section constituted a simple, versatile and user-friendly 
platform that can be extrapolated to other kind of processes, even to other microorganisms, requiring only simple 
modelling data from the system to work with.  
On a second part of this dissertation, scaling studies were performed by taking the production of ROL by 
P. pastoris 
under PAOX1 control as reference, both down to a microbioreactor scale and up to 50 L.   
On one hand, the microbioreactor system RoboLector was stablished as a feasible tool for the development of simple 
fed-batch operational strategies of P. pastoris growing on methanol and for screening assays for clone selection.  
On the other hand, the production of ROL was brought up to a 50 L scale and it was not possible to achieve the 
desired levels of any of the performance indexes that were found in lab scale.  
After performing several analyses, the most plausible hypothesis that was driven out of the results is the possible 
problems of homogeneity of the dissolved oxygen alongside the reactor height. Alongside with this, future work has 
to focus as well to clarify if dimers of ROL are being produced when certain operational conditions are given. 
To conclude, the main objective of this PhD dissertation is very important to be remarked at this point: to achieve a 
reliable, robust bioprocess to obtain, as a product of interest, the lipase of 
Rhizopus oryzae, heterologously produced \n\n 
 
 1
86 
 
8. General conclusions Bioprocess efficiency as a roadmap to establish Pichia pastoris as a reliable cell factory 
by P. pastoris using methanol as the only carbon source. From this point, reaching top levels of bioprocess efficiency 
was paramount, since it enables to reinforce Pichia as a cell factory. The work described throughout this dissertation 
has been successful on this matter by fulfilling the points that have been reviewed here.  
 